DMK (Dravida Munnettra Kazhagam)

Protecting the small scale industries and public sector units from the economic recession in the US, giving more autonomy for States, raising the income tax exemption limit from Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 2.5 lakh per annum, 60% devolution of tax revenue to States, establishing an Indian Institute of science ( IISc) in Chennai and the second unit of Integral coach factory are some of the issues the ruling DMK would take up with the new Government at the Centre post Lok Sabha Elections.

In its manifesto for Lok Sabha Elections for 2009, the party said education should be restored to State list. In 1976, it was shifted from the State list to the Concurrent list. As a result, the development of education is retarded due to the existence of dual authorities.

In the next five years, expenditure on education and health should be increased to 7% and 3% respectively. As the States play a direct role in providing education and healthcare to the poor, the Centre should transfer more resources to them.

Releasing the manifesto on Thursday, DMK President and Chief Minister, M Karunanidhi said his front is set to win all the 40 seats as in the previous 2004 elections. He said it would seek votes on the plank of five slogans: Secular and good governance; uphold religious harmony; defend social justice; nurture equality and promote democracy.

Recalling the historical achievements of UPA inclusive of DMK in the last five years, the manifesto said, " the 13 Union Ministers from Tamil Nadu have implemented a number of schemes for the development of TN and India. TN obtained 11% of the total plan expenditure of the Union Government amounting to nearly Rs 3.70 lakh crore over the last five years. This unprecedented financial transfer facilitated implementation of 69 union plan schemes in the State".

Stating since 1990, several progressive changes have taken place in Indian federalism, it said a conducive political development has emerged facilitating coalition governance with the support of regional parties. In fact, the Indian economy witnessed the higher growth rate of 7 to 9 only during these periods. " The time has now ripened for the constitutional federalism to blossom out of the existing political federalism".

The party is in favour of making appropriate changes in the Constitution for autonomy at the State level and federal Governance at the union level to strengthen federalism in India. It has placed its views before the commission on centre-state relations constituted by the Centre in 2008.

The party will insist on the speedy implementation of Sethusamudram canal project, establishing a southern gas grid in the State for transportation and distribution liquid gas, setting up the R & D wing of ONGC and implementing a 250 mw solar energy plant as a pioneering scheme in TN.

It has also promised the voters to take up with the centre for introducing more super fast trains, new broad gauge lines and extending the mass rapid transit system upto Mamallapuram.

Even as it is proud of the 8% growth rate achieved in the last five years, the manifesto said the the global financial crisis has adversely affected the industrial sector, pulling down the the country’s growth rate. In spite of these challenges, TN attracts new investments in industrial and IT sectors.

Among other things, the party wants the centre to extend full financial support to the TN Government’s initiative in inter-linking rivers in the State. It will insist on the Centre to declare minimum support price for paddy on par with MSP for wheat and increase the price for paddy.

In the case of sugar cane, the cultivators in the State are getting Rs 1220 per tonne as state advised price against the MSP of Rs 811.80 per tonne announced by the centre. As the cane growers are demanding a SAP of Rs 1500 per tonne, DMK will constitute a tripartite committee of officials, growers and industry representatives to study the demand and make recommendations.
