
Parliamentary General elections to the 14th Lok Sabha are to the conducted soon. Following elections to the 13th Lok Sabha in 1999, the National Democratic Alliance Government was formed with the DMK, MDMK, PMK and others as constituent parties. But, during the last five years of the NDA Government, Ministers from these parties representing Tamil Nadu failed to lend any support to the development plans to Tamil Nadu or to the State’s social welfare schemes to improve the quality of life of the people of Tamil Nadu. Based on the belief that if such beneficial plan allocations which were obtained from the Centre by the efforts other Chief Minister Puratchi Thalaivi J Jayalalithaa, reached the people, it would only enhance the prestige of Chief Minister J Jayalalithaa, these parties were pursuing with vengeance their obstructionist policies. Though the people of Tamil Nadu had voted them to power and made them MPs and Central Ministers with the fond hope that they would work for the development of Tamil Nadu, they were only assiduous in betraying the very people who elected them, to power. Ignoring the welfare of the people of Tamil Nadu who had elected the, they were only intent on looking after their own interests for the entire period of 6 years. They threw to the winds the tall poll promises that they had made to the people of Tamil Nadu at the time of the 1999 Lok Sabha Elections.

AIADMK stands for following issues:
Co-operative Federalism
Official Language at the Centre
Classical Language
Secularism
Social Justice
Women’s Reservation
Guardian of Tamil Nadu
Protection of Tamils
Financial Resources to States
Economic Development and Poverty Eradication
Employment Opportunities
Agricultural Development
Cauvery Water: Our Fundamental Right
Nationalisation of Rivers and their inter-linking
Changes in Import Policy
Labour Welfare
Welfare of Unorganised Labour
Welfare of Weavers
Fishermen Welfare
Providing Infrastructure to Industries
Public Sector Undertakings
Sethu Samudhram Project
Upgrading Airports
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY

Elections to the 14th Lok Sabha
April-May 2004

VISION DOCUMENT - 2004

Dear Countrymen,

Elections to the 14th Lok Sabha will take place in April-May 2004. The Bharatiya Janata Party, along with its partners in the National Democratic Alliance, has entered the electoral fray seeking a renewed mandate under the visionary leadership of Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee. On this occasion, I am pleased to present before you the 'Vision Document 2004', which sets forth our Party's core beliefs, basic commitments, and our priority agenda for the next five years and beyond.

India is an ancient civilisation with a rich cultural and spiritual heritage. We have perennial rivers, fertile land, hardworking kisans, industrious workers, skilled artisans, great intellectuals, a robust scientific and technological establishment, and capable entrepreneurs. Why, then, did India lag behind in development? The answer lay in the Congress party's wrong polices and long misrule.

The Congress era in Indian politics is over. The era of the BJP has begun. India has now embarked on a path of rapid progress and all-round development. India is more ambitious, more self-confident and more capable now than ever before.

For the BJP, our vision, our political journey and our distinctive identity have always been personified by Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee. Since the inception of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, and the founding of the BJP, Shri Atalji has been our leader, guiding the Party throughout its steady march forward in the past five decades, inspiring countless Indians with his poetry, his thoughts, his tapasya, and his towering personality. Because Shri Atalji best personifies our Party's vision, we have decided to illustrate this document with pictures showing different facets of his political life.

I do hope that this Vision Document succeeds in persuading you to give an absolute majority to the BJP and a two-thirds majority to the NDA in the 14th Lok Sabha.

Vande Mataram!

M. Venkaiah Naidu
President
Bharatiya Janata Party

Highlights

1 Making India a Developed Nation and a Great Power by 2020, and creating an 
unshakeable national resolve to achieve this goal.

2 Further strengthening national security both external and internal -- to overcome 
present and future challenges.

3 Further broadening and deepening of economic reforms, based on a self-reliant approach, for sustained double-digit GDP growth rate to achieve complete eradication of poverty and unemployment; end of regional and social disparities; and bridging the urban-rural divide.

4 Achieving a quantum improvement in the quality of life of all Indians by fulfilling their basic needs in education, healthcare, nutrition, drinking water, housing, sanitation, and cultural development.

5 Launching the Second Green Revolution to unleash the tremendous growth potential in Indian agriculture and agro-based industries, eliminating waste in the food chain, and to ensure doubling of income of even a marginal farmer by 2010.

6 Bringing vibrancy to small-scale industries, cottage enterprises and activities of rural artisans; revitalization of traditional industries like textiles; and giving due recognition and full encouragement to the informal sector of the economy.

7 Giving India a world-class infrastructure in power, telecom and IT, roads, railways, air travel, ports, shipping and inland navigation, markets and the financial sector.

8 Making India a major exporting nation, a global manufacturing hub; a preferred service provider to the world; a preferred country for higher education and healthcare; a leading creator of R&D; putting India at the centre of the Knowledge Economy; and making India a major tourist destination in the world.

9 Preparing India for the momentous shift taking place in the world economy, in which low-cost economies can score a big march over high-cost economies by building competitive strengths in manufacturing and services; enriching our human resources and reforming our economy towards this end, and turning our young population into a huge opportunity in the era of globalisation.

10 Dealing with the challenge of water on a war-footing with a three-pronged approach: Launch of the River-Linking Project; Massive encouragement for micro initiatives such as watershed management, checkdams, rainwater harvesting, drip irrigation, etc; Cleaning up of rivers and traditional water bodies.

11 A massive rural development programme based on the concept of an Ideal Indian Village.

12 A massive urban renewal programme, based on the concept of an Ideal Indian City.

13 Comprehensive Good Governance Reforms, encompassing administrative reforms, judicial reforms, electoral reforms, devolution of powers to States and effective empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions and urban local bodies.

14 Commitment to construction of a magnificent Ram Mandir at Ayodhya; Amicable resolution of the issue through dialogue for starting a new chapter in Hindu-Muslim relations;

15 Educational development, economic upliftment, and empowerment of minorities; and ending the majority-minority distinction in politics.

16 Vigorous pursuit of the ideals of social justice, economic justice and empowerment of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Nomadic and Denotified Tribes, OBCs, and the poor among the Forward Classes.

17 Ban on religious conversions through fraudulent and coercive means.

18 Intensification of the peace and development process in Jammu & Kashmir and the North-East. Ensuring early return of Kashmiri Pandits and other displaced people to their native places.

19 Commitment to women's all-round empowerment; the BJP is ready to back any consensus formula to ensure early legislation for women's reservation in Parliament and State Legislatures.

20 Legislation to ensure that important offices of the Indian State can be occupied only by those who are India's natural citizens by their Indian origin.

21 Empowerment of the Civil Society to promote people's participation in development at all levels and for creating effective dispute resolution mechanisms outside the realm of the government and the judiciary.

22 Making population control a people's movement, with non-coercive disincentives for a two-child norm, and incentives for a girl child.

23 Preservation and propagation of India's rich cultural heritage.

24 Unleashing 'Yuva Shakti' and making India a major sports power in the world.

25 Intensifying dialogue with Pakistan to find a lasting solution to all bilateral issues; working for a multi-polar world, with India as one of the poles; further raising India's standing in the world; and securing for India a meaningful and steadily growing role in international affairs.

Introduction

India on the Move

The people of India will elect the 14th Lok Sabha in the elections to be held in April-May 2004. The Bharatiya Janata Party, as the leading constituent of the National Democratic Alliance, enters this electoral battle seeking a renewed and bigger mandate for the NDA, with a significantly larger representation for itself, in the next Lok Sabha. We do so on the basis of our Performance, Vision and Leadership the proud performance of our Government; our clear vision and programme for making India a strong, secure, and integrally Developed Nation by 2020; and the inspiring leadership of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee which is the continuing link between our performance so far and our pledge for the future.

In 1999, the people voted for the National Democratic Alliance. The Bharatiya Janata Party was the largest constituent of the NDA and the single largest party in the Lok Sabha. Our promise to the people then was encapsulated in the assurance: "Able Leadership, Stable Government". On both counts, we have more than fulfilled our promise.

The Vajpayee Government's achievements in strengthening national security, countering cross-border terrorism, fortifying national unity, setting India on the path of high socio-economic growth, making development the national mantra, and raising India's image and standing in the international community have created a surge of hope and national pride.

The Pokharan-II blasts in May 1998 triggered a process of national resurgence. India successfully beat back post-Pokharan sanctions imposed by big powers. The same countries are now keen on strengthening comprehensive relations with India. There has been a significant reduction in cross-border terrorism. India has also played a widely acclaimed role in creating international awareness and solidarity on the issue of jehadi terrorism.

India's economic fundamentals are robust and its strengths envied. Today ours is one of the fastest growing economies in the world; India's GDP growth rate is estimated to be over 8 per cent this year. Our Government has heralded a Connectivity Revolution in India. Some of the largest and most ambitious projects are now underway for improving India's infrastructure with highway connectivity, rural roads connectivity, telecom and Internet connectivity, railway connectivity, port and airport connectivity. The past five years have seen the largest ever number of BPL families rising above the poverty line over a comparable period in independent India's history.

Major steps have been taken for addressing the long-neglected needs of agriculture. Agricultural credit has been nearly trebled and over 3.5 crore farmers have been given Kisan Credit Cards. Interest rates have been significantly lowered. Minimum Support Prices for over 25 crops have been raised every year. An innovative Farm Income Insurance Scheme has been introduced.

In a short time, India has emerged as a leading power in Information Technology. In a short time, our manufacturing sector has restructured itself and become globally competitive. Individual Indians have always script ed success stories in India and overseas; now India as a whole is big news. Today, India stands tall in the international community. Its voice is heard and respected. Our people are finding fresh recognition and new audiences.

There is a rapidly widening belief, both in our own country and all over the world, that India is poised for a great leap forward.

Ours is an ancient nation with a civilisation that is more than 5,000 years old. We have inherited a glorious cultural heritage, which the entire world marvels at. India has time and again shown unmatched resilience to overcome the vicissitudes of history, to emerge resurgent. The time of Indian Renaissance has arrived again. We have set the stage to reclaim our rightful inheritance as a Great Power contributing to humanity's all-round progress.

The Congress era in Indian politics is over

The BJP holds the Congress party, which ruled India for the longest period since Independence, principally guilty for the many problems that our Government inherited. Half a century is not too short a time for a country to be liberated from the curse of poverty and backwardness. India did make considerable progress during this period. But this progress fell woefully short of her potential as well as her needs.

This wide gap between promise and performance was the result of the wrong policies of successive Congress governments. They promoted corruption, weakened institutions of the State and failed to mobilise people's participation in the development process. The Congress party weakened the bonds of national unity and social harmony for partisan gains. Allowing itself to be reduced from a great party of the Freedom Movement to a tool in the hands of a family, it sought to reduce the world's largest democracy to dynastic rule.

The Congress era in Indian politics is now over. And the BJP's era -- the era of nationalist, democratic and development-oriented politics -- has begun.

India is today a nation once again on the move. We have recovered our bearings. After five decades of wasted opportunities, the Vajpayee Government has infused new life and vigour into the soul of India. From being a nation of unrealised potential, its policies and performance have helped unleash India's positive energies.

Atalji's Leadership: A Source of Pride

The BJP is proud that it has given India and the world a leader of the calibre of Shri Vajpayee. As Prime Minister, he has harnessed the national energy and transformed the national mood. With his fierce integrity, long tapasya, commitment to the ideals of democracy, indomitable patriotism and statesmanship, he has shown that he is an embodiment of India's best political traditions.

Shri Vajpayee has demolished the Congress party's self-serving myth that it alone, and a member of the Nehru family alone, can rule India. He has effected a mindset change in the country. In polity, his leadership has demonstrated that coalition governance can be stable and successful. In society, his personality has promoted the values of tolerance, understanding and partnership. In our neighbourhood and in the world, his statesmanship has championed the cause of peace and dispute resolution through dialogue, while resolutely guarding our national interest.

Under Shri Vajpayee's leadership, an atmosphere of distrust and disharmony has been replaced by a spirit of cooperation and consensus. The highhandedness and partisanship that marked the Centre's relations with the States have given way to a healthy Union. With a good blend of national outlook and legitimate regional aspirations, the NDA Government has brought the diverse sections of our society closer together.

The Prime Minister has shown unprecedented earnestness to resolve outstanding and inherited problems. Thus, Jammu & Kashmir is returning to peace, normalcy and development after what seemed to be an unending era of strife, terror and separatist activities fomented from across the border. The fulfilment of his promise to hold free and fair elections in the State in 2002 was a major milestone in this process.

Peace talks in the North-East are also making headway. No Central Government in the past paid as much attention to the developmental needs of this important region as the Vajpayee Government has. For the first time since Independence, a separate ministry has been established for this purpose.

The BJP considers the Joint Statement issued during the Prime Minister's January visit to Islamabad a historic foreign policy success for India. For the first time, through this joint statement, Pakistan has committed itself to preventing the use of any part of the territory under its control for terrorist activities aimed against India.

If Shri Vajpayee won the hearts of Indians and the admiration of the international community with his firm leadership during the Kargil War, he is repeating the feat now with his earnest pursuit of peace-through-dialogue with Pakistan. The whole world today recognizes him as a "Man of Peace".

Shri Vajpayee has boldly demolished the culture of cynicism and negativism that impaired the national character. He has inspired India to think big, implement big, and believe in itself. He has motivated the youth to nurture big dreams and to work hard to realize them. He is indeed "The Great Unifier", binding India's aspirations, energies and diversities.

The Context era in Indian Politics is Over

For the people of India the 2004 general election is an opportunity to reaffirm faith in the leadership of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee and in the policies of the NDA Government. These have yielded initial results and, taken forward, will definitely produce big gains for India and all Indians.

The 2004 general election is also an opportunity for all Indians to reject the grim, feel-pain record of the Congress party and endorse the feel-good mood generated by the our Government.

Every election has a specific context. According to the BJP, the two main issues of Election 2004 are: good governance and accelerated, all-round development. There is a new type of hunger in India the tremendous hunger for development. It is especially acute in rural areas and among the urban poor. They want to free themselves from poverty, backwardness and underdevelopment. They want to see an end to regional and social imbalances in development. They want the rural-urban divide to be bridged. They want the best opportunities for themselves and their children. They want a standard of living that is fulfilling. They want dignity. They want security and prosperity.

India is now impatient to get to the top. India wants to be the best. One billion Indians want to show to themselves, and to the world, what they can do.
India has had enough of negativism. The BJP is committed to making India a Developed Nation and a Great Power on the global stage.

We have the leadership, we have the commitment and we have the vision to make India shine ever brighter.

In 2004, we seek a decisive mandate for India.

Our Basic Mission and Commitments

Politics as a means to serve the Nation: From modest beginnings, the BJP has grown steadily to emerge as a stable pole of Indian politics. Our growth is rooted in our distinctive ideology and the tireless dedication of millions of our karyakartas throughout the country. In Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, ably assisted by Shri Lal Krishna Advani, we have a leadership that has guided and inspired our Party for decades. For the BJP and the fraternal organisations that constitute our extended Nationalist Parivar, politics and power have never been ends in themselves, but a means to serve the people and to contribute to India's attainment of Param Vaibhav (peaks of glory).

Strengthening India's Democracy: The BJP is deeply committed to strengthening India's democracy and to making its institutions more effective in fulfilling the aspirations of our people. We are proud that our Party has nurtured the best traditions of internal democracy in India's political class. In the years to come, we shall continue to broaden the interaction between the Party organization and the people, between the people and their elected representatives, and between the Party and the Government to make governance more dynamic, more responsive and more responsible.

Integral Humanism: The BJP is proud of its commitment to the philosophy of Integral Humanism, as enunciated by Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya. We believe that development cannot be measured by economic indicators alone. Development must be holistic. It must fulfil the material and non-material needs of all individuals and promote a symbiotic relationship between the individual and society, in which the individual works for society, and society, in turn, cares for the individual. Development must also keep in mind environmental concerns, local and community traditions, and the quality of life.

The BJP believes that economic progress should not be at the cost of family values. The family constitutes the social unit of stability, welfare, and continuity of cultural traditions. Its importance can never be undermined. Integral Humanism teaches us that our nation too is a family and that India itself is a part of the larger human family.

Cultural Nationalism: The BJP draws its inspiration from the history and civilisation of India. We believe that Indian nationhood stems from a deep cultural bonding of the people that overrides differences of caste, region, religion and language. We believe that Cultural Nationalism for which Indianness, Bharatiyata and Hindutva are synonyms -- is the basis of our national identity.

Contrary to what its detractors say, and as the Supreme Court itself has decreed, Hindutva is not a religious or exclusivist concept. It is inclusive, integrative, and abhors any kind of discrimination against any section of the people of India on the basis of their faith. It rejects the idea of a theocratic or denominational state. It accepts the multi-faith character and other diversities of India, considering them to be a source of strength and not weakness. It firmly upholds secularism, understood as Sarva Pantha Samabhav (treating all faiths with respect).

However, the BJP unflinchingly holds that differences in faith cannot challenge the idea of India as One Nation or undermine our millennia-old identity as One People. This is why, we rejected the two-nation theory on the basis of which our Motherland was tragically partitioned in 1947. Thus, Cultural Nationalism is the most potent antidote to communalism, divisiveness, and separatism of every kind, and a guarantor of our national unity and national integration.

Ram Mandir in Ayodhya: The BJP reaffirms its commitment to the construction of a Ram temple in Ayodhya. As Maryada Purushottam, Ram is an inspiring cultural symbol of India. His birthplace in Ayodhya is also associated with the religious sentiments of crores of Hindus. The BJP remains committed to its stand that the judiciary's verdict in this matter should be accepted by all. However, we believe that dialogue, and a negotiated settlement in an atmosphere of mutual trust and goodwill, are the best way of achieving this goal. The BJP appeals to the religious and social leaders of the Hindu and Muslim communities to speed up the process of dialogue and bring it to an amicable and early fruition. We hope that these efforts will succeed in heralding a new chapter of amity in Hindu-Muslim relations and fortify national integration.

Religious Freedom, our Core Value: Contrary to the propaganda of the Congress and our other political opponents, Shri Vajpayee's government has not discriminated against minorities, nor curtailed their religious freedoms in any manner. In statecraft, we will continue to be wedded to our founding ideal of "Justice for All, Appeasement of None". We envision the day when the distinction between "majority" and "minority" disappears in the political field, even while people practise their respective faiths unhindered.

The BJP gives a three-point assurance to minorities: Education, Economic upliftment, and Empowerment. At the same time, we appeal to them to change their old mindset vis-à-vis the BJP and strengthen the hands of Shri Vajpayee in the coming elections.

Consensus over Uniform Civil Code: The BJP believes that all laws, including personal laws, must be in accordance with the guarantees available to all citizens under the Indian Constitution. The Constitution calls for the enactment of a Uniform Civil Code. The Supreme Court has reiterated this need. Therefore, this cannot be seen as an issue of any single political party. The BJP views Uniform Civil Code primarily as an instrument to promote gender justice. We believe that social and political consensus has to be evolved before its enactment.

Swadeshi: The BJP believes that every civilisation has its own innate genius. We are committed to Swadeshi, the philosophy of India First, and to the path of self-reliance. Swadeshi means faith in indigenous institutions and a strong belief that the future of India must be secured by Indians themselves.

The BJP believes that India's goal of achieving a double-digit annual GDP growth rate on a sustainable basis can be achieved principally by mobilizing our own domestic resources. A strong, efficient and high-growth Indian economy, in which Indian products, services and entrepreneurs dominate the domestic and global markets, is our concept of Swadeshi. This can be achieved by making Indian products and services competitive on both cost and quality.

Globalisation: The BJP believes that, to reduce the risks and challenges of globalisation and to enhance its opportunities and gains, it is imperative to bridge the current divide between the developing and developed economies. This divide is enabling the developed nations to secure unfair advantages for itself in global trade, investments, agriculture and services. They give huge trade-distorting agricultural subsidies to their own farmers, but object to the legitimate pro-farmer measures by developing countries. The NDA Government has been at the forefront of defending the interests of Indian kisans by bringing about a coalition of developing countries against such unjust practices of developed countries. We did so successfully at the WTO meets in Doha and Cancun. Our Government has also successfully defended India's case in other matters such as patents. This approach shall continue.

The BJP is of the view that a big shift is taking place in the global economy, and India should be prepared to take advantage of it. This shift favours low-cost economies over high-cost economies in manufacturing and services, provided the former have sufficient competitive strengths on the counts of cost, quality and technology. The Indian economy is rapidly acquiring these strengths. The BJP is committed to accelerating this process by further reforming our economy, modernizing our infrastructure, enriching India's human resources, and augmenting our capabilities in science and technology. This will place our predominantly young population in an advantageous position vis-à-vis many advanced nations in the world that are projected to have a demographic disadvantage in the coming decades. This is the Swadeshi approach to turning globalisation into an opportunity for India in the 21st century.

Underpinnings of Our Economic Vision: The BJP believes that India must greatly enhance her economic strength, in order to enhance her national strength and become a Great Power. Towards this strategic goal, the BJP is committed to ensuring faster economic growth with equity, employment, and social justice.

The underpinnings of our economic vision are: steady enhancement of the productivity of our human and natural resources with the best use of science, technology, management and HRD practices, both modern and traditional; removal of regional and social imbalances; bridging the urban-rural divide; minimizing the gap between the rich and poor; maximizing developmental opportunities for all citizens; and environmental protection.

The BJP believes that, as India moves from being a developing country to a developed one, our economic policy has to have a two-pronged approach: policies to achieve faster economic growth combined with effective welfare measures for the poor. Today the foremost national developmental objective is banishment of poverty by increasing our national wealth. The surest way to achieve this goal, as Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya had emphasized four decades ago, is: "Work for Every Hand and Water to Every Land". Agriculture continues to be the backbone of India's rural economy, sustaining the livelihood of a majority of our population. Government policies must, therefore, be geared to encourage domestic savings and directing them into productive, entrepreneurship-promoting and employment-generating investments, especially in agriculture and other areas of the rural economy.

The BJP believes that wealth creation should be applauded and encouraged. However, conspicuous consumption goes against the cultural ethos of India. We are not in favour of selfish advancement of the few. Rather, the BJP believes in the multiplication of universally accessible entitlements for the majority.

The BJP is committed to greater consumer choice. We believe that the creation of monopolies, both in the public and private sector, are undesirable, except when dictated by national security. We believe in a responsible fiscal regime marked by modest deficits, low inflation and a steadily strengthening rupee.

India's Cultural and Spiritual Heritage: The BJP considers India's priceless cultural and spiritual heritage to be our intangible national wealth. It has protected our family system, sustained our national life over the millennia and given India her unique identity in the world. We are proud that all the world's religions have their footprint in India. We believe that a proper use of our cultural and spiritual resources can greatly aid India's developmental endeavours because of their enormous power to mobilize people's energies. This cultural and spiritual heritage displays immense diversities, which should be cherished and celebrated by all Indians as our common endowment.

We consider it to be the bounden duty of the Government and citizens alike to preserve and further augment this wealth of a diverse heritage. In this context, the BJP applauds the NDA Government's decision to launch national missions for the preservation of manuscript s, monuments, and other facets of our cultural, artistic and spiritual heritage. However, a lot more needs to be done, considering the neglect of this crucial aspect of nation-building in the past.

Our Priority Agenda for the Next 5 Years

(The BJP has suggested specific measures under the following areas for inclusion in the NDA's Manifesto for Election 2004.)

Defence: The BJP has always attached the highest importance to national security. We are proud of the NDA Government's historic initiatives to strengthen India's defence capability and preparedness. We commit ourselves to carrying forward the work done in the past five years. Our priorities will be: speedy implementation of all the ongoing programmes for modernisation, acquisition and capability enhancement; minimizing delays and procedural bottlenecks, which push up costs and cause obsolescence; achieving greater efficiency in defence spending; giving a further boost to indigenisation of defence production and encouragement to private sector participation; and making defence exports a thrust area.

The BJP would also work for further augmentation of welfare measures for ex-servicemen and war widows, creating adequate opportunities for retired officers to contribute to development activities where they can put their skills and training to productive use; and making service in the Armed Forces an attractive career option for the educated Indian youth.

Internal Security: The BJP believes that creating a society free of fear, and ensuring safety and security to all citizens form the cornerstone of good governance. Our war on terrorism, which has shown encouraging results in the past five years, will continue with unflagging determination. Building on the significant reduction of communal and caste violence in the past five years, we shall work with redoubled zeal to realise our vision of a riot-free India.

The long misrule of the Congress party weakened India's internal security apparatus and reduced its capacity to counter jehadi terrorism, left-wing extremism, organised crime, and, in some States, even to maintain law and order. For the first time since Independence, the NDA Government conducted a comprehensive review of the internal security scenario, started to act on its recommendations and launched a massive programme to modernise our police and paramilitary forces. The BJP is concerned at the inadequate utilization of the police modernization fund in several States, even though the need for it is glaring. We will work with State Governments for time-bound implementation of this programme with utmost urgency.

We will continue our efforts to build political consensus to enact a Central law, and constitute a federal agency to deal with federal crimes like the Telgi scam, which encompass several States. We will also work with the States to urgently implement police reforms that would make the police and security forces more people-friendly, more sensitive towards the grievances of the poor, weaker sections of society, and women.

The BJP recognises the growing menace of left-wing extremism, which extends from the Nepal border to Andhra Pradesh, as one of the most serious challenges to India's internal security. Overcoming this menace, with the closest possible cooperation among the affected States and the Centre, will be our priority. Since the fight against Naxalite outfits can be successfully waged primarily by isolating them from local populations, our Government will take further steps to speed up development activities, encourage people's participation in them, and ensure that their benefits actually reach the poor.

Jammu & Kashmir: The unity of India is not only sacred to the BJP, but also a paramount commitment. We have always believed that Jammu & Kashmir, including the PoK, is an integral part of India. We hold that the age of redrawing national boundaries is over. While recognizing that the Constitution provides for certain transient and temporary provisions for Jammu & Kashmir, we believe that the immediate challenge before the Centre and the State is to involve all sections of society in eliminating terrorism, accelerating economic development and strengthening popular governance that can provide people-friendly administration. The imperative for security operations has to be balanced with respect for human rights. We are committed to ensuring early return of Kashmiri Pandits and other displaced people to their native places.

We believe in balanced development of all the three regions of the State Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh without any discrimination against any section of the State's population. To ensure this, the BJP is committed to a three-point programme:

(a) Autonomous Regional Councils for Jammu and Ladakh with adequate financial and administrative powers;

(b) Protection of the original demographic identity of the three regions.

(c) Equitable distribution of funds from the Centre.

The BJP strongly condemns the recent move by the Government of J&K to introduce a law that discriminates against women marrying outside the State in matters of inheritance rights. We will do everything democratically possible to stop such anti-women moves.

North-East: The NDA Government has given unprecedented attention to the development of the North-Eastern States. Consolidating the gains already made, we are committed to achieving:

(a) Restoration of peace and normalcy in all the disturbed regions by dialogue with all groups who are willing to give up the path of violence, and by firmly dealing with those who continue on this path.

(b) Ensuring that the ethnic identities of all the people in the North-East are protected.

(c) Putting an end to infiltration from Bangladesh and vigorously pursuing the 3-D formula--Detect, Delete, and Deport.

(d) Accelerating economic development that provides growth opportunities to all.

(e) Development of the communication infrastructure to overcome the constraints of physical distance.

(f) Making all Indians more aware of the rich history and cultural heritage of our North-Eastern States, including Sikkim.

(g) Expanding regional economic cooperation with countries in our eastern neighbourhood and in SouthEast Asia.

The BJP is also committed to imparting further momentum to the activities of the Island Development Authority to attend to the needs of the people of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshdweep Islands.

Poverty Alleviation: The BJP stands committed to tackling dire poverty on a war footing. The persistence of abject poverty after more than 50 years of Independence is a result of both misrule and the faulty policies followed by the Congress. In the past six years, the number of Indians living below the poverty line has diminished significantly. However, an unacceptably large number of our citizens are so steeped in poverty that they are unable to reap the full benefits of India's march forward, or to contribute their fullest to it.

We shall wipe out the problems of poverty and backwardness by mounting a five-pronged attack:

By policies aimed at fully harnessing India's productive potential and creating national wealth;
By policies that ensure distributive justice by expanding the basket of opportunities for all;
By policies that direct greater governmental investment and incentivise more private investment in backward and rural areas;
By policies and programmes that bring vibrancy to the rural economy, expand and deepen rural markets, and thus create large-scale employment and self-employment opportunities locally.
By continuing and further strengthening Antyodaya schemes targeted at BPL families and social security schemes aimed at the unorganized sector.
By effecting time-bound distribution of surplus land and making the rural poor partners in the development of wasteland;
By giving inalienable ownership rights to tribals who have been traditionally living on forest lands.
Second Green Revolution: The route to agricultural prosperity and rural regeneration lies in scientific management of water, land and bio resources, and better linkages with both domestic and export markets. Our vision has three objectives: (a) Indian agriculture should meet the growing domestic demand; (b) it should emerge as an important global player; and (c) agriculture should become remunerative even to small farmers with shrinking landholdings.

The first Green Revolution enabled India to achieve self-sufficiency in food. However, it did not address many critical problems in agriculture and food economy. The BJP believes that a Second Green Revolution is needed to increase farm productivity, achieve crop diversification, reduce waste and add value at every stage in the food chain linking the kisan to the consumer. Towards this end, we will continue to give a boost to dairy, poultry and other food-processing industries. We will promote horticulture, floriculture, sericulture, and cultivation of bio-fuels, medicinal plants and bamboo in a big way. We will take up crop insurance scheme and the newly launched farm income insurance scheme for effective and large-scale implementation. Comprehensive reform of agricultural markets; free movement of agricultural goods throughout the country; setting up of cold storages, godowns and grain banks; intensification of technology transfer and agricultural extension services; and support to organic farming will be given priority in the Second Green Revolution.

Agricultural workers, many of whom are marginal farmers themselves, form a large section of the rural poor. The BJP is committed to lifting them above BPL levels, ensuring sustainable year-long employment with minimum wages, enhancing their labour productivity, expanding the social security net for them, and improving their overall quality of life.

The BJP is fully committed to preserving India's animal wealth especially, to protection of Gau Mata (Cow) and her progeny. We shall evolve a consensus to bring a Central legislation in this regard.

Support to Cottage Industries: Revitalization of India's cottage industries, arts and handicrafts forms the pivot of the BJP's vision of faster economic growth with equity and employment. Towards this end, we will intensify our efforts to ensure that the banking sector and government departments are receptive to their special needs. We will improve linkages with domestic and export markets for their products. Activities of the Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and its affiliate bodies, which have done remarkable work in the past five years, will be given greater support.

Making India a Global Manufacturing Hub: The BJP believes that India can become the manufacturing hub for the world. India's capability to achieve this goal is evident from the highly encouraging initial successes in pharmaceuticals, automobiles, auto-components, engineering goods and some other products. We aim to provide the conditions for a broad manufacturing base that can export its products all over the world, and can compete not only on cost but also on quality and technology. In the process, we aim to actively facilitate the creation of global Indian brands and Indian MNCs. Our small and medium enterprises (SMEs), the KVIC sector, and traditional industries such as textiles, gems and jewellery and leather, have a huge potential to contribute to this endeavour. This potential will be unleashed through suitable policy and institutional measures. We will take necessary steps to realize similar growth potential in our food-processing, telecom and IT hardware, and other industries.

A competitive manufacturing sector requires the simultaneous fulfillment of various conditions. They include a network of good roads and railways, efficient ports and airports, low-cost and reliable power, cutting-edge communication and IT infrastructure, strengthening of India's core sector oil and natural gas, steel, coal, minerals, metals --, quality educational institutions that provide a skilled workforce, a sophisticated financial sector which can meet low-cost capital needs of businesses, modern trading environment, and, above all, maximum government facilitation with minimum government interference. Specifically, firm and quick steps will be taken to put an end to the tyranny of the Red Tape and the Inspector Raj, which breeds, corruption, drains the growth potential and demotivates Indian entrepreneurs.

We are proud that India has successfully embarked on this growth-oriented path. Unlike during the Congress years, the "Made in India" brand is making waves in global markets. We envision a future when it will dominate world markets in a wide range of products, creating large-scale prosperity and employment at home. The BJP will actively work for the realization of this vision.

Putting India at the Centre of the Knowledge Economy: The BJP is proud of the spectacular achievements of India's software professionals and entrepreneurs both at home and abroad. They have not only given India a new stream of wealth-creation and employment generation, but also brightened our country's image globally. The BJP believes that this is just the beginning, and the best of India in the emerging Knowledge Economy is yet to come.

To achieve this, we have to consolidate India's leadership in software exports and strengthen our IT hardware industry. We also have to expand our share in employment-intensive IT-enabled services across the value spectrum through enterprises like call centers and Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) centres. The BJP sees India emerging as a preferred service provider to the world in an ever-widening range of services, including high-paying professional services of teachers, doctors, lawyers, managers, accountants, and scientists. We will fully support our bio-technology sector, which is making rapid strides. India has acquired impressive self-reliant strengths in space research, peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and civilian applications of defence research. These strengths will be further augmented and commercialised appropriately. We will also strive to develop Indian businesses in other frontier areas of technology, such as micro-electronics, nano-technology, new materials, etc.

To achieve these ends, we have to make India a front-ranking nation in scientific and technological R&D. Partnership between Indian businesses and CSIR, DRDO, ICAR, ICMR, ISRO, BARC, IITs, universities and other government-supported research institutions will be vastly expanded. We will actively encourage more foreign companies to set up their R&D centers in India or start joint R&D activities with Indian entities. Our NRI and PIO professionals and entrepreneurs would be encouraged to participate in this partnership.

Our Vision for an Ideal Indian Village: A majority of India's population continues to live in villages. However, the neglect of the development needs of villages is one of the particularly damning parts of the legacy left behind by the long Congress misrule. This is clear from two stark facts: even after five decades of Independence, as many as 1.86 lakh villages one-third of all villages in the country were deprived of good roads; and as many as 60% of our rural households have no toilets.

In line with what Mahatma Gandhi had said, the BJP believes that India cannot rise to her full potential without the revitalization of rural India. Our vision of an ideal Indian village is one that has the following attributes: (a) self-reliant society and dynamic economy that makes best use of local human and natural resources and has linkages to the national and global economy; (b) modern infrastructure and basic amenities -- bijlee, sadak, paani, education, quality healthcare at the nearest place, and sanitation -- that are needed to ensure a high quality of life for all inhabitants; (c) full employment to all able-bodied persons; (d) free of social and economic exploitation; (e) a harmonious, cooperative and caring environment; (f) Antyodaya or concern for the development of the last man; (g) effective functioning of Panchayat bodies with people's participation and involvement of voluntary organisations; and (h) a vibrant cultural life that displays both modernity and pride in Indian traditions.

The BJP is committed to taking all our villages towards this ideal. We have taken several important steps in this direction, the most notable among them being the blueprint of a new comprehensive rural development initiative called PURA (Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas). PURA aims at providing four types of connectivity to every Indian village: Physical Connectivity, Digital Connectivity, Knowledge Connectivity, and Market Connectivity to every rural cluster in the country. Speedy implementation of this programme will be our priority.

Our Vision for an Ideal Indian City: India is rapidly urbanizing. At the same time, Indian cities and towns are groaning under unplanned and unaesthetic growth, made evident by their overstretched infrastructure, severe shortage of basic amenities, proliferation of slums, and unhygienic environment. This has affected the quality of life of all sections of the urban population most of all the urban poor. The continuance of this reality is incompatible with our vision of India as a Developed Nation.

No previous government paid as much attention to urban renewal as the Vajpayee Government has done since its inception. HUDCO's loans for urban infrastructure rose by 550% during the past six years, compared to the previous 28 years.

Our vision of an ideal Indian city is one in which our cities (a) provide a high quality of material and cultural life to all their inhabitants, with strong human bonds that is the hallmark of Indian society; (b) have good infrastructure, civic amenities, and pollution-free environment; (c) are free of slums and illegal encroachments, and display aesthetic city planning; (d) preserve their unique tangible and intangible heritage; (e) are engaged in promotion knowledge and diverse creative pursuits; (f) Have good municipal governance with strong community participation and, above all, (g) serve as engines of India's rapid economic growth, providing adequate employment opportunities and ideal conditions for entrepreneurs and professionals to flourish in the era of globalisation.

The BJP is committed to working towards this ideal by introducing major urban governance reforms and massively expanding the programme for urban renewal in the coming years.

Dealing with the Challenge of Water: The BJP recognises that scarcity of water in both rural and urban areas has assumed serious proportions in many parts of the country. There is an urgent need for a people's movement, supplementing government efforts, for conservation, management and rational use of this scarce resource for drinking, agriculture, industry and domestic purposes. The problem needs a multi-pronged strategy that combines both mega and micro initiatives. We remain fully committed to starting work on the inter-linking of rivers, with due consideration for environmental protection and rehabilitation of displaced people.

However, we attach greater importance to millions of local initiatives for desilting of tanks, lakes and reservoirs, restoration of wells, recharging of natural aquifers, building check dams, promotion of drip irrigation, desalination of sea water, rainwater harvesting, recycling of water, and other means of water conservation and efficient water management. Cleaning of all polluted rivers and traditional water bodies, with people's participation of the kind that was evident in olden times, should be taken up in a mission mode.

Dealing with the Challenge of Employment: The BJP recognizes that unemployment is a major problem faced by a significant section of the Indian youth. At the same time, we confidently state that no other government in the past paid as much attention to dealing with this problem, and achieved so much success, as did the NDA Government. It is our Government, which, for the first time, promised to facilitate creation of one crore additional employment and self-employment opportunities each year. We have substantially succeeded in fulfilling this promise. Between 1999-2002, for which official figures are available, 84 lakh employment and self-employment opportunities were created on average, per year.

The nature of employment generation has altered with the changing nature of the economy. Government jobs and jobs in the organized industry are shrinking not only in India and this is true of Congress and Communist-ruled States too but all over the world. At the same time, large-scale employment and self-employment opportunities have come up in services and the unorganized sector (whose preponderance in the Indian economy has been steadily growing), housing and road construction, telecom and IT, tourism, etc.

In the coming years, our strategy to deal with the challenge of employment will be four-pronged:

Sustaining a high rate of annual GDP growth 8% going up to double digits and broadbasing the growth in employment-generating sectors of the economy.
Higher allocation to, and better implementation of, the Government's employment and self-employment generation schemes such as the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana, which is the biggest food-for-work programme since Independence launched by our Government, self-help groups, etc.
Evaluating every development policy and programme from the point of view of its potential to create employment and self-employment opportunities. Policies and programmes that promise to deliver this goal will be given special thrust. Thus, agri-processing, support services for agriculture, textiles, handicrafts, wasteland development, social forestry, housing and construction activities, renewal of urban infrastructure and amenities, retail trade, tourism, transportation, etc. will be given priority in terms of investment and facilitation.
Providing special thrust to vocational education and training to match the needs of the economy. In rural areas our focus will be mainly on skill upgradation of people engaged in traditional occupations. In urban areas our focus will be mainly on enhancing the employability of students and youth, and create an aptitude for self-employment and entrepreneurship.
Developing a Democracy of Stakeholders: The BJP is committed to continuing reforms in the financial sector that have contributed to better performance of the corporate sector and the evolution of well regulated stock markets. We believe that the gains of this process must be shared more equitably. Today, less than 2 per cent of Indians are retail investors. We believe that the base of investment in equities must be broadened. The BJP believes that the advantages of low interest credit must be shared by all productive forces in society, including small businesses, the self-employed and farmers.

The BJP is proud that the vigilance and intervention of the Union Government have helped revive institutions like the UTI. We believe that public financial institutions and corporate houses must conduct themselves with exemplary responsibility.

Widening the Social Security Net: The BJP is proud of the NDA Government's initiative to launch a social security scheme for 37 crore people in the unorganized sector. Expanding its coverage and its effective implementation will be our commitment. The BJP believes that all Indians must have access to competitive and well regulated pension and insurance schemes tailored to every income level. The needs of senior citizens, widows, disabled persons, etc will continue to receive our special consideration. We shall ensure that money invested will be both secure and fetch good returns.

Focus On Social Development

The BJP believes that faster economic growth cannot be an end in itself; rather, it is a means to ensure a high quality of life to all citizens by fulfilling their material needs and satisfy their social, educational and cultural aspirations.

Education for All: We believe that both society and the Government at all levels must give top priority to meeting the goal of "Quality Education for All" since education aids both economic growth and social development. Its importance in the emerging Knowledge Economy has increased manifold. Enriched human resources of our one billion population can propel India into a higher orbit of development with limitless possibilities in the new century.

The BJP's ideal of good education is one expressed in Swami Vivekananda's profound words: "Education for Man-Making and Nation-Building". India needs a system of education that opens the doors of knowledge to all citizens, develops their talents and skills, anchors them strongly in human values and Indian culture, reinforces their patriotism, and equips them to explore opportunities both in India and abroad.

Because of inadequate and unbalanced attention by successive governments in the past, India continues to face major challenges in education. Our strategy for overcoming these challenges and unleashing the potential of the India's enviable human resources has the following underpinnings:

Steadily raising the total spending on education to 6% of the GDP by 2010, with enlarged public-private partnership.
Achieving complete eradication of illiteracy within a decade. For this, we will ensure that every child goes to school, every school is made accountable to the community, every State is made accountable for its quality education status, and appropriate resources both from Government and non-government sources are mobilized to match our ambitious goals.
Further intensification of measures aimed at education of the girl child, and spread of education among SCs, STs, OBCs and minorities.
Improving the standards of education at all levels of the Educational Pyramid from primary to university.
Making quality education affordable to a common Indian family. No student should be deprived of access to higher education for lack of resources. Hence, scholarships and soft loans should be made widely available.
While encouraging private investment, necessary steps will have to be taken to check commercialization of education.
Rectifying the biases in history education, increasing the moral and cultural content in syllabi, and restoring the neglected focus on character-building.
De-bureacratising the administration of our educational institutions; autonomy to centers of excellence; empowering teachers; and maximizing community participation.
Enlarging the partnership between Government and the private sector, and between industry and universities, to promote world-class R&D.
Making India a preferred higher education destination for students from all over the world. This would not only reduce huge spending abroad by rich Indians, but also enable India to earn significantly from higher education.
Healthcare for All: The BJP believes that healthcare is a basic need and rightful entitlement of every citizen. Hence, its provision should be made immune to the citizen's economic status. Wrong policies, inadequate resource allocation, and neglect of our country's traditional wisdom by the Congress governments have created daunting problems in this field. The BJP's strategy to overcome them, and to enable India to move quickly towards the goal of "Health For All", is guided by the following principles:

The Centre and State Governments should together facilitate manifold increase in spending on healthcare, with enlarged public-private partnership.
The priority of public spending should be on primary healthcare, with a focus on preventive rather than curative measures.
Increasing people's awareness about health issues and making them take good care of themselves by cultivating healthy habits and lifestyles; towards this end, building a strong physical and sports culture among all age-groups.
Healthcare should be made affordable to the poor and middle classes.
The NDA Government's good work in promoting yoga, ayurveda, naturopathy and other systems of indigenous medicine should be vastly intensified.
Private and foreign investment in tertiary and super-specialty healthcare should be encouraged. However, all private healthcare establishments should have enhanced obligation for treating poor patients.
Public-private partnerships should be institutionalized on a widest possible scale.
Concerted efforts should be made for India's emergence as a centre of health tourism.
Social and Economic Justice: The BJP has always been a strong votary of social justice for SCs, STs, OBCs and other disadvantaged social groups. Going beyond the traditional advocacy of this important cause, we have also been consistently emphasising two related imperatives (a) social justice is incomplete without economic justice and political empowerment; and (b) The means to secure social justice (samajik nyay) have to also promote social harmony (samajik samarasata).

To advance these ideals, the BJP commits itself to:

Strict implementation of provisions of the policy on reservations. A major drive has to be launched for filling up all backlogs in jobs and promotions for SCs, STs and OBCs.
Private sector enterprises will be incentivised for creating more educational, training, employment and entrepreneurship opportunities for SCs and STs.
Strict enforcement of laws to check atrocities against SCs, STs and other weaker sections.
Provision of greater financial resources and better managerial resources for the delivery of education, healthcare, and other social security services to the poor and weaker sections of society.
Improvement in the functioning of various Commissions and Finance Corporations for the development of SCs and STs.
Operationalisation of the newly announced Commission for Nomadic and Denotified Tribes and development corporation for the shepherd community.
Safeguarding and promoting the economic wellbeing of fishermen and others engaged in traditional occupations.
Serious consideration to the recommendations of the newly established Commission for examining reservations for the poor among "Forward Classes".
Welfare of Tribals: Of all the deprived and neglected sections of society, tribal Indians suffered the most during the long Congress rule. Their ability to benefit from the policy of reservations in education and jobs has remained far less than that of the Scheduled Castes and OBCs. Many of them have been uprooted from their habitations and livelihoods in forests. Frequently they are victims of exploitation by powerful local interests and harassment by the police and government officials. They rank the lowest in literacy, longevity, health status and other indicators of human development.

The BJP is committed to ending the plight of India's tribals. Ours was the first government, since Independence, to set up a separate ministry for tribal welfare and also a separate commission and a separate finance and development corporation for tribals. We shall take necessary steps for regularization of land rights of tribals living on forest lands and for promoting their economic activities based on forest produce. These measures, in addition to providing them livelihood security, will also help in preservation of our forests. The BJP believes that, as the original inhabitants of forests with a deep attachment to their natural endowments, tribals are the best protectors of our depleting forest and wildlife resources. We will also take steps to preserve tribal art and culture, honour tribal heroes, and frustrate efforts to create a wedge between tribals and non-tribals.

Women's Empowerment: The BJP is committed to gender equality and justice. We consider educational, social, economic and political empowerment of women to be one of the preconditions for making India a Developed Nation. Our Party is committed to providing women an enabling environment free from injustice and violence in the public as well as the private sphere, which would pave the way for women to contribute to every walk of life. We would develop strategies to enable women in balancing work and family by introducing a national childcare plan, decent wages, workplace flexibility, and greater career opportunities.

The BJP believes that every able-bodied woman should have at least some source of livelihood, so that she can enjoy economic independence within the framework of a harmonious family. Education not only equips her to raise her economic and social status, but also helps our country realize many of its developmental goals. Accordingly, the BJP commits itself to eliminating gender disparities in both education and property rights. In official records of schemes such as giving land or a house, woman will be made a joint beneficiary having precedence over man. Opportunities for women in training, employment, self-employment and entrepreneurship will be expanded. Simultaneously, we will intensify governmental and societal efforts to ensure safety for women, and clamp down on female foeticide, dowry, trafficking and rape.

India has a very rich tradition of the social reforms movement where men championed the cause of women. In the 21st century, it is once again necessary for men to play a constructive role in establishing gender equality. They can play an especially crucial role in ensuring dignity of women and eliminating violence against them.

Ours was the first party to raise the demand for 33% reservation for women in Parliament and State legislatures. We remain committed to this goal. It is well known that the NDA Government did its best to enact the Women's Reservation Bill. However, the Congress and some other parties sabotaged it. The BJP is prepared to support any alternative proposal for women's reservation, on which broad consensus can be forged. We believe that the nation's commitment to take this revolutionary step forward can no longer be kept in abeyance.

Population Control: The BJP is convinced that neglect of the imperative of population control is one of the main causes for the shortcomings in India's all-round development. The Vajpayee Government has taken steps to overcome this neglect. We believe that the goals and targets set in the National Population Policy can be realized only by making it a people's movement. State Governments -- especially in those States that are lagging behind -- and communities have to be energized. The BJP also believes that the time has come to introduce a set of incentives and non-coercive disincentives for the success of this campaign. We are in favour of providing incentives for the girl child within a two-child norm. Our Party shall build consensus over ways that would ensure success of this mission.

Securing a Bright Future for India's Children: India is home to the largest child population in the world. Every fifth child in the world is an Indian. Hence, what happens to India's children will determine not only India's future, but also the future of the world. For the BJP, securing a bright future for India's children is both a moral obligation and a matter of political urgency. We are proud of the Vajpayee Government's initiatives in this regard for example, making free and compulsory elementary education a fundamental right through a Constitutional amendment; launching 'Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan', the biggest ever educational programme since Independence; and vastly enlarging the scope of the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) to cover nearly all the blocks in the country.

We are committed to further intensifying our efforts to put the needs, aspirations and rights of children at the heart of our development agenda. Drastic reduction in infant and maternal mortality, special focus on the education of the girl child, ending malnutrition among children from poor families, elimination of child labour, and the care of orphans will be our priority.

Unleashing India's 'Yuva Shakti': Demographically India is a Young Nation. Nearly 65 per cent of our population is below the age of 35. This 'yuva shakti' (youth power) is a source of immense strength and hope for the India of our dreams in the 21st century. Our first priority is to ensure that every young Indian is gainfully employed or self-employed, securing not only their own livelihood but also contributing to their family's well-being and to the country's progress. By their very nature, young people are an overflowing reservoir of energy, enthusiasm, creativity, idealism and patriotism. It is the duty of the government and society to create opportunities for the full flowering of these attributes. Care should be taken to see that their grievances and resentment over any issue are not exploited by parochial and anti-social elements.

The spirit of adventure among the youth and their natural inclination for voluntary service need to be promoted. Infrastructure for sports, arts, cultural activities and social service, and support for youth organizations engaged in these activities, need to be stepped up at all levels from the national to the local. In particular, Indian sports, which have suffered marginalisation, deserve special encouragement. We are proud that the Vajpayee Government not only created a separate Ministry for Sports and Youth Affairs for the first time since Independence, but also effected a five-fold increase in the allocation for sports in the Tenth Plan. The BJP's vision is to see that India emerges as a major Sports Power in the world over the next ten years. We will work for the realization of this vision.

Good Governance Issues

Governance Reforms: The principal aspect of the Congress misrule was its failure to transform India's hard-won Swaraj (self-governance) into Su-raj (good governance). It caused the government to enter every sphere of our national life, excessively enlarging the ordinary citizen's interface with the public authority. The overload of the government has led to inefficiency, harassment and corruption. Rather than being at the service of the people, the state machinery has reduced them to being supplicants. Its lack of transparency and accountability has alienated the people. Its highly bureaucratic working has undermined their entrepreneurial energies and discouraged citizens' initiatives. In the absence of people's active participation, policies and programmes frequently fail to deliver desired results.

Punitive levels of taxation created a national culture of dishonesty. The licence-permit-quota raj produced a shortage economy and bred corruption and nepotism. The government was often the cause of the problem and not the solution.

The BJP is committed to making the role of the government more focused and effective by initiating a set of reforms for Good Governance with the same priority as economic reforms. Specifically, we will make the government's interaction with citizens more people-friendly and service-oriented. We will make the government's principal role in the economy that of a facilitator and creator of the necessary environment for the creative energies of the people to find full expression. We will reduce discretionary powers vested with public authorities, and base the exercise of such powers on objective criteria. We will ensure exemplary punishment for infringement.

The BJP is committed to removing all non-financial barriers to economic growth such as delays in clearances and decision making; obsolete laws, unnecessary procedures, and habitual litigation; lack of adequate empowerment of officers at appropriate levels; and lack of a level-playing field in the functioning environment of executives in the public sector vis-à-vis their private sector counterparts.

Re-orienting the Priorities of Government: The BJP believes that the thrust of the Union government in future should be on the core areas of national security, internal security, macro-economic management, and creation and upgrading of infrastructure. It should also expand the scope and improve the quality of services and amenities in the social sector, particularly targeted at the poor and disadvantaged communities. The government's traditional function of administration and upholding the rule of law and justice will have to be further strengthened.

In the economic sphere, the government should progressively withdraw from involvement in non-priority sectors. It should create more avenues for entrepreneurship in a well-regulated competitive framework. In general, it should reduce its role in manufacturing and services business, where the private sector can serve the people better except where it is required for strategic reasons, to prevent private sector monopolies, run important utilities, or in exceptional circumstances.

At the same time, there is a need to enhance systemic capabilities for better policy formulation in the social sector, better designing of schemes and programmes, and, above all, better monitoring of their implementation. Towards this end, there is a need to maximize community participation and involve voluntary organizations, professional experts at all levels. In short, efficiency, accountability, responsiveness, pro-poor attitude, and treating the people as one's masters will be the hallmark of administrative reforms in the years to come.

Judicial Reforms: The BJP is firmly committed to the independence of the judiciary. At the same time, we acknowledge that judicial bottlenecks have become a major source of harassment for ordinary citizens. They are also acting as an obstacle to our economy growing faster. Therefore, we shall speed up judicial and legal reforms on an urgent basis. Our specific commitments are:

Considerable enhancement in allocations to improve the physical and operational infrastructure of our courts;
Increasing the number of courts and appointment of more judges at all levels;
Reform of the criminal justice system to make dispensation of justice simpler, quicker and more effective;
Extension of Fast-Track Courts to all layers of the judiciary;
Expansion of alternative dispute redressal mechanisms through Lok Adalats and Tribunals;
Setting up a National Judicial Commission for appointment of judges and ensuring judicial ethics.
Electoral Reforms: The NDA Government has introduced certain important electoral reforms such as rightsizing of the Council of Ministers at the Centre and in States, open ballot in Rajya Sabha elections to check misuse of money power, the facility of proxy vote to defence personnel, etc. We have made political funding more transparent. The BJP will pursue this agenda vigorously by working towards state funding of elections. We shall evolve a consensus to prevent entry of criminal elements into politics. In cooperation with other political parties, the BJP will consistently strive to raise the standards of Parliament and State Legislatures and making their functioning more effective.

The BJP firmly holds that the high offices of the Indian State legislative, executive and judicial should be occupied only by those who are India's natural citizens by their Indian origin.

Effective Empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions: The BJP believes in Gandhiji's philosophy that Ram Rajya cannot become a reality without Gram Rajya. We are committed to decentralisation and grassroots democracy, with the village as the unit, through transfer of power from the Centre to the States, from State governments to Panchayati Raj Institutions and from impersonal bureaucracies to communities. We believe that effective empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions is the most urgent good governance task for achieving the cherished ideal of speedy and all-round rural development. The 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution, introduced by the Congress government, devolved many important functions to Panchayati Raj Institutions. However, they failed to equip these institutions with necessary financial and administrative powers to discharge their Constitutional obligations. The BJP will remove this shortcoming by enacting, if necessary, a new Constitutional amendment.

The institution of the Gram Sabha will be strengthened. We believe that it is the most effective platform for promoting grassroots democracy, since it enables all the people in a village to discuss every developmental work, scrutinise the allocation and spending of funds, and evaluate the performance of panchayat and government functionaries.

Improving Fiscal Health of State Governments: The BJP believes that the distortions introduced by Congress governments in the past have undermined the financial viability of States. Several policy and administrative measures have become necessary to stop unproductive expenditure and enhance the resource mobilisation powers of States and institutions of local government. The BJP will strive to build political consensus, which is critical for achieving this objective.

The NDA Government has initiated the process of liberating India from an overdose of controls. It has abolished many state monopolies, simplified procedures, cut red tape in many places and eased controls. The BJP is committed to a simplified and low tax regime. Lower taxes encourage entrepreneurship, less tax evasion, a dynamic work culture and enable people to save more and spend more on themselves, their families and their communities. At the same time, efforts will be intensified to further expand the population of tax payers to reflect the growing preponderance of services in our economy, ensure better compliance, and plug significant leakage of tax revenue at various levels.

War on Corruption: The BJP believes that corruption is the greatest hurdle in India's developmental march. It has weakened the moral fabric of our society and polity. The long years of Congress rule have created a system of governance and administration where power is frequently misused for personal gain. Ordinary citizens often have difficulty getting their work done in government offices, without paying bribes. The BJP believes that the menace of corruption has to be fought at all levels. This requires both systemic reforms especially electoral and administrative reforms -- and heightened public action. No single political party can win the fight against corruption on its own. However, the BJP is committed to playing a leading role in its eradication.

Empowering Civil Society: After Independence, the Congress party let the country down on good governance. It also created an atmosphere of "statism", which made the Government machinery all-powerful and the people excessively dependent on it. As a result, the people's initiative and their efforts to solve their own local problems took a back seat. The Government did not sufficiently trust the organizations of civil society, and the people in turn did not trust the Government to deliver. The lack of people's participation in government-led development became one of the principal reasons for India's slow progress.

The BJP believes that this has to be changed by empowering communities, voluntary organizations, not-for-profit groups, and respected senior citizens in society. The NGO sector, too, needs to apply self-correctives for it to play its role in the developmental process. We believe that there is a big scope for enlisting the cooperation of religious establishments of all denominations, which command large followings, in schemes and programmes for social development. We also believe that empowerment of the Civil Society will help in achieving dispute resolution ranging from local disputes over minor issues to major ones over contentious issues -- outside the realm of the judiciary and government. This vision is consistent with the traditional Indian approach to dispute resolution.

Strengthening India's links with the Indian Diaspora: The BJP believes that the growing achievements of the vast Indian diaspora are a matter of pride and a source of strength for India. Similarly, India's growing strength and its rising global stature are also a matter of pride and a source of strength for the Indian diaspora. Together we constitute the Great Indian Family. We are proud of the NDA Government's unprecedented efforts to broaden and deepen the emotional, social and economic links of NRIs and PIOs with their cultural motherland. These links will have to be comprehensively strengthened in the years to come.

India and the World

With the world recognizing India as an emerging power, our foreign policy has to become far more active, creative and sure-footed. This process has already begun under the NDA Government, which has launched a number of bold initiatives over the past five years. Our Look-East Policy has greatly strengthened the India-ASEAN relationship, reinforcing our close cultural links with this region in the past with new links in trade, technology and transport. We have recently given economic cooperation within SAARC a new impetus, creating the promise of free-trade in South Asia. Our economic cooperation with China is growing at an amazing speed. We have further strengthened our strategic partnership with Russia, expanded relations with USA, intensified our dialogue with the European Union, and rejuvenated traditional bonds with countries in West Asia, Central Asia, and Africa.

The BJP believes that this new pro-active and self-confident thrust of India's foreign policy should be continued. Our aim should be to secure for India a steadily broadening role in international affairs, so that we can contribute meaningfully to the global community's collective ability to deal with the challenges of today and tomorrow.

The broad contours of the BJP's vision for India's external affairs in the coming years are:

Continue the dialogue process with Pakistan for a lasting solution to all the outstanding issues, including Jammu & Kashmir, on the basis of the Joint Statement issued in Islamabad in February 2004.
Work towards realizing the vision for a South Asian Economic Union with a common currency for the region.
Continue the dialogue process with China to achieve a mutually satisfactory resolution of the boundary issue, which is an objective of strategic interest for us.
Intensify efforts to create suitable alliances to secure access to new energy sources.
Work for the creation of a cooperative multipolar world order, with India as one of the poles.
Continue efforts to secure permanent membership of the UN Security Council.
Conclusion

"Shaktishali Bharat ke liye Shaktishali BJP": For the past five years, Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee has given India a purposeful and dynamic government, ending the debilitating period of destabilization perpetuated by the Congress. Under him, India has entered the 21st Century with greater self-confidence, vastly enhanced capacity for achievement, and soaring expectations.

The remarkable progress made in the past six years is, however, only a beginning. India still has a long way to realise its full potential begins to flower. Inspirational leadership and good governance have put development on top of the political agenda. The BJP is committed to carrying forward this process and further strengthening it over the next five years and beyond.

Our vision is to make India a Developed Nation by 2020 strong in security, strong in national unity, strong in economy, strong in democracy, strong in diplomacy, and, above all, strong in every parameter of human development of all her one billion people.

Our vision is to make the 21st Century India's Century.

History has chosen the BJP to provide political leadership to our national endeavour to realize this vision. "Shaktishali Bharat ke liye Shaktishali BJP" is our clarion call.

A renewed and stronger mandate in Election 2004 an absolute majority for the BJP and a two-thirds majority for the NDA -- is the crucial first step to realise this dream.

To recall the Prime Minister's ringing words, "India's destiny is linked to victory for the BJP and the NDA."
A renewed mandate for Shri Vajpayee is a mandate for India's renewal.

Vande Mataram!
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY

Bharatiya Janata Party released the party manifesto in New Delhi. BJP promises a new POTA-like law and also woos the poor and middle class with many promises. Many senior BJP leaders including party prime ministerial candidate LK Advani, President Rajnath Singh, Manifesto Committee Chairman Murli Manohar Joshi and spokesperson Ravi Shankar Prasad. Following is the full text of BJP's Lok Sabha Elections 2009 manifesto.

To build a prosperous, powerful nation, recall India’s past
Indian civilisation is perhaps the most ancient and continuing civilisation of the world. India has a long history and has been recognised by others as a land of great wealth and even greater wisdom. But India has also experienced continued foreign attacks and alien rule for centuries and this has resulted in a loss of pride in India and its remarkable achievements. Indians, particularly educated under the system of education imposed by the Britishers, have lost sight of not only the cultural and civilisational greatness of India, but also of its technological achievements and abounding natural resources.

History tells us that India was a land of abundance. The country has been blessed with great natural fertility, abundant water and unlimited sunshine.

According to foreigners visiting this country, Indians were regarded as the best agriculturists in the world. Records of these travels from the 4th Century BC till early- 19th Century speak volumes about our agricultural abundance which dazzled the world. The Thanjaur (900-1200 AD) inscript ions and Ramnathapuram (1325 AD) inscript ions record 15 to 20 tonnes per hectare production of paddy. Now, even after the first green revolution, according to Government statistics, Ludhiana in the late-20th Century recorded a production of 5.5 tonnes of paddy per hectare. It is, therefore, imperative that India rediscovers an agricultural technology which incorporates all the inputs from our own wisdom and agricultural skills that made us a land of abundance in food.

Indian economy was as flourishing as its agriculture. Foreigners from Magasthenes to Fa-Hian and Hiuen-Tsiang have described and praised Indian material prosperity. Indian villages around 1780 in Bihar have been cited as an example of cleanliness and hospitality. The streets were swept and watered and the people had a remarkable sense of hospitality and attention to accommodate the needs of the travellers.

Old British documents established that India was far advanced in the technical and educational fields than Britain of 18th and early-19th Century. Its agriculture technically and productively was far superior; it produced a much higher grade of iron and steel. The Iron Pillar at Mehrauli in Delhi has withstood the ravages of time for 1,500 years or more without any sign of rusting or decay. Metallurgists of the world have marvelled at this high degree of sophistication in technology. Textiles formed the great industrial enterprise of pre-British India. Up to the late-18th Century, India was the leading producer and exporter of textiles; China was then a close second.

Indian advancements in astronomy, mathematics, chemistry, physics and biological sciences have been documented and recognised all over the world. Contributions in the field of medicine and surgery are also well known. Ayurveda and Yoga are the best gifts from India to the world in creating a healthy civilisation. India knew plastic surgery, practised it for centuries and, in fact, it has become the basis of modern plastic surgery. India also practised the system of inoculation against small pox centuries before the vaccination was discovered by Dr Edward Jenner.

Fa-Hian, writing about Magadha in 400 AD, has mentioned that a well organised health care system existed in India. According to him, the nobles and householders of this country had founded hospitals within the city to which the poor of all countries, the destitute, the crippled and the diseased may repair. 

"They receive every kind of requisite help. Physicians inspect their diseases, and according to their cases, order them food and drink, medicines or decoctions, everything in fact that contributes to their ease. When cured they depart at their ease."

It has been established beyond doubt by the several reports on education at the end of the 18th Century and the writings of Indian scholars that not only did India have a functioning indigenous educational system but that it actually compared more than favourably with the system obtaining in England at the time in respect of the number of schools and colleges proportionate to the population, the number of students in schools and colleges, the diligence as well as the intelligence of the students, the quality of the teachers and the financial support provided from private and public sources.

Contrary to the then prevailing opinion, those attending school and college included an impressive percentage of lower caste students, Muslims and girls.

Mahatma Gandhi was absolutely right in saying that India was more illiterate in 1931 compared to its state of literacy 50-60 years ago, i.e. in 1870. India had also an expertise in ship building, as also in extensive manufacturing and uses of dyes, and also in manufacturing paper. India had a share of about 22.5 per cent of world GDP in 1600 AD which during British domination suffered a steep decline to 12.25 per cent in 1870, while the British share in the same period rose sharply from 1.8 per cent to 9.1 per cent. When Britishers left India, the economy was completely shattered and India’s share in world manufacture, trade and GDP declined further. Even after 62 years of Independence, India’s share in world market remains less than one per cent. India’s prosperity, its talents and the state of its high moral society can be best understood by what Thomas Babington Macaulay stated in his speech of February 02, 1835, in the British Parliament.

"I have travelled across the length and breadth of India and I have not seen one person who is a beggar, who is a thief, such wealth I have seen in this country, such high moral values, people of such high caliber, that I do not think we would ever conquer this country, unless we break the very backbone of this nation, which is her spiritual and cultural heritage, and therefore, I propose that we replace her old and ancient education system, her culture, for if the Indians think that all that is foreign and English is good and greater than their own, they will lose their self esteem, their native culture and they will become what we want them, a truly dominated nation." This policy was implemented very meticulously by Britishers and the education system was created to make Indian’s ignorant about themselves. No nation can chart out its domestic or foreign policies unless it has a clear understanding about itself, its history, its strength and failings. It becomes all the more important for any nation to know its roots which sustain its people in a highly mobile and globalised world. Leaders like Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, Sri Aurobindo, Mahatma Gandhi and others who spearheaded the freedom movement had built the struggle around a clear vision of India’s civilisational consciousness. Indian ways of thought and action were in the centre of their political action. These leaders had a vision to reconstruct the political and economic institutions of India as a continuum of the civilisational consciousness which made India one country, one people and one nation. It is unfortunate that the leaders of independent India quickly discarded this vision and continued to work with the institutional structures created by the British which had nothing to do with India’s world view and its vitality which were responsible for its survival despite continued outside attacks and alien rule.

During the six decades of our independence, governance of our country, except for a short period, was with the Congress and its associates. It was most unfortunate that they never thought of creating a socio-economic and political paradigm of governance drawing from the civilisational consciousness of India. They, instead, tried to emulate whatever was being practised in this or that Western country. The disastrous results are before us.

What was required after independence was to reorient India’s polity to bring it in consonance with the seeking and sensibilities of the Indian people. Failure to do so has resulted in a fractured society, vast economic disparities, terrorism and communal conflict, insecurity, moral, psychological and spiritual degradation, and a state apparatus unable to handle any of these problems. Attempts are sometimes made to apply palliatives to manage the affairs but nothing succeeds. What is needed is to arrive at a consensus about the ‘Idea’ of India and also about the seekings and preferences of the people and how they find expression in various socio-economic, political organisations and cultural, aesthetic and ethical sensibilities of the people of India.

The civilisational consciousness of India has been well defined by the sages and philosophers and has its roots in Bharatiya or Hindu world view. This world view is holistic and spiritual. It accepts that diversity is inherent in the scheme of creation; it is the manifestation of the same cosmic entity in different forms. Hence it not only accepts diversity but respects it and even more celebrates it. Hindu or Bharatiya view of life seeks unity in diversity. It is an inclusive approach and one can say that Hinduism is the most ennobling experience in spiritual co-existence. The Bharatiya mind has contemplated beyond national boundaries and the Vedic Rishi declared in the hoary past Vasudhaiva Kutumbukam – that the world is a family. 

India’s worldview are known to have extended from Bamiyan / Kandahar to Borobudur / Indonesia on the one hand, and Sri Lanka to Japan on the other. Imprints of Indian culture are found in some other parts of the world as well. In ancient times India was isolated in geography but not in cultural relationship, trade and commerce. The belief in essential unity of mankind is a unique feature of Hindu thought. The Vedic Rishi had also declared that Ekam Sad Viprah Bahudha Vadanti (truth or reality is one but wise men describe it in different ways). This is essentially a secular thought in the real sense of the term because it accepts that one can follow his own path to reach the ultimate. Hindus are well known for their belief in harmony of religions. And because of this world view almost all religions practised in different parts of the world have existed peacefully in India and will continue to do so. But it appears that even after six decades of independence India has not been able to discover its innate vitality and its sense of time and consequently has lost its direction and will to act. The drift is acute and has encompassed all aspects of national life. The situation needs a change and a new paradigm is called for, for creating a prosperous, progressive and powerful India whose voice is heard in international fora.

India can achieve this goal provided the people seriously set to this task. We are endowed with vast human and material resources. Indian youth have demonstrated their capabilities in various walks of life and proved their competence.

In science and technology, space and atomic energy, despite handicaps and lack of world class facilities, they have done remarkably well. In industry, business and management and information communication technology, they have successfully taken challenging risks. With this energetic and vibrant youth power and by prudently harnessing natural resources, Indians can perform miracles provided they work with self-confidence and pride in India. We have to assure a prominent role and full opportunities to our youth in the decision-making process. They are the future and the propellers of our prosperity.

India need not blindly copy this or that model of development; it should evolve a model suited to its genius and resources. The Integral Humanism suggested by Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay provides such a model. India should be original, India should innovate, and India should move upwards on the ladder of global leadership. The global scenario demands a solution, a radical solution to save the world from the impending disaster of the Great Economic Recession and terrorism looming large all over the world. India is destined to play its historic role at this crucial juncture and for this the BJP is committed to work for creating a modern, powerful, prosperous, progressive and secure India.

Dr Murli Manohar Joshi Chairman Manifesto Committee April 3, 2009.

For stability & security India needs a decisive leader

A quirk of fate brought the Congress to power at the Centre in the summer of 2004. The United Progressive Alliance that it put together, which was able to secure parliamentary majority with the help of the Left parties, has shown remarkable lack of cohesiveness with individual Ministers representing the Congress’ allies running their allotted Ministries like their personal fiefdom. This was a Government totally divorced from the twin principles of collective responsibility and accountability.

The nation was thus burdened with a Prime Minister who was in office but not in power; and, a Government that was in power but not in authority. This was supposed to be a Government that would work for the welfare of the aam admi – the common man. As it prepares to exit office after five years, the Government has nothing to show by way of extending a ‘hand’ to the aam admi.

This Government will be remembered for four things. It was headed by the weakest Prime Minister the country has ever had. Its reversal of NDA’s policies has led to a mounting sense of insecurity fuelled by repeated terrorist attacks, Maoist insurgency and separatist violence which together have claimed hundreds of innocent lives. Its gross mismanagement of the economy has caused inflation, job losses and lockouts. And, it has shielded corruption at high places by misusing agencies of the state, namely the CBI.

The Congress has tried to whitewash its terrible record on the national security front, especially its abysmal failure to protect citizens from terrorism, by making cosmetic changes in antiquated laws. This is clearly not enough. It has sought to gloss over the increasing cost of food, which is eight per cent higher than in 2008, and many times more than in 2004, by projecting misleading statistics.

Lakhs of people in the unorganised sector have lost their jobs over the past year. Skilled workers are losing their jobs in the organised sector. This is far worse than unemployment because it impoverishes families dependent on assured income and dampens the national spirit.

The worst hit are India’s youth, especially those who are looking forward to enter the job market. The Congress-led UPA Government has gifted them with a bleak future. As for the poor, they feel abandoned by the Congress-led regime. The much-publicised National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme has turned out to be as much a flop as all other schemes of the Government. It is a telling comment on the UPA’s performance that a whopping 55 million people have been pushed below the poverty line over the past five years. This is according to a study by the Indian Statistical Institute, based on data collated by the National Sample Survey Organisation; the real figure could be much higher.

In rural India, thousands of farmers have committee suicide to escape the burden of mounting debt and grinding poverty. They are victims of Government apathy. An equally damning indictment of the Congress-led UPA regime is galloping urban poverty. An estimated 23.7 per cent of the population in cities and towns lives in slums, according to ‘India: Urban Poverty Report, 2009’, amid squalor, crime, disease and tension. Such glaring deprivation and denial, such rising numbers of people below the poverty line, contradict this nation’s aspirations. They are obstacles to India’s emergence as a great power and need to be removed through remedial Government intervention. The stability of the NDA years helped India to prosper. The drift of the UPA years has put India in reverse gear. The BJP will restore the stability which India desperately needs.

The BJP, immediately upon coming to power, will address the key issues of security and economy. It will resume the employment-generating, prosperity-creating policies of the NDA government headed by Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, through massive investments in infrastructure projects, by nursing agriculture back to health, and by making credit easily accessible to industry, while ensuring the safety and security of all people from the depredations of terrorists. India today faces a severe crisis of leadership. The nation needs determined and decisive leader who has the capacity, commitment and conviction to take command of the situation and lead from the front. The country needs a leader who can restore Government’s credibility and the people’s confidence in themselves. The polity needs a leader who values consensus over conflict, consultation over confrontation. Then alone can good governance replace the all-round failure of the Congress.

Shri Advani has an exemplary record of service to the nation covering over six decades. A leader of impeccable integrity, he was one of the chief crusaders for democracy during the Emergency (1975-77) and spent 19 months in jail. He led the Ayodhya movement, the biggest mass movement in India since Independence, and initiated a powerful debate on cultural nationalism and the true meaning of secularism. Along with Shri Vajpayee, he was the principal architect of the BJP’s triumph, as the head of the National Democratic Alliance, in forming a stable and successful non-Congress coalition Government at the Centre (1998-2004). As India’s Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister, he ably assisted Shri Vajpayee in steering the ship of the nation through difficult waters.

The BJP is proud that it is seeking the people’s mandate in the 2009 general election, along with its allies in the NDA, under the leadership of Shri Advani. The BJP is contesting the 2009 15th Lok Sabha election on a Manifesto that commits the party to an agenda for change guided by three goals: Good governance, development and security.

Our focus will be on the nation’s youth, on addressing their concerns and helping them achieve their aspirations. We will lay emphasis on empowerment through excellence by providing quality education. We will ensure the security of life and property. Reviving the economy, re-orienting it towards agriculture, rural development, and unorganised and informal sectors; creating adequate employment opportunities for the youth; pushing back the price line; and, investing heavily in infrastructure projects are at the top of our agenda.

The BJP believes that after five years of drift and missed opportunities, the time has come for a Government that works, a Government that cares. Our primary concern will be India’s rapid, inclusive, equitable and all-embracing development and stable growth that benefits the largest number of people. We will invest in rural development; we will ensure higher agricultural productivity and guarantee an assured income to farmers; and, we will protect the livelihood of the masses while creating myriad opportunities of gainful employment. 

National security: Fear shall no longer stalk this land

The last five years have been a nightmare for the people of this country as terrorists, separatists and insurgents have led the effete UPA Government on a macabre dance of death and destruction. From the daring attack on Delhi on the eve of Diwali in 2005 to the fidayeen raid on the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya, from the horrendous bombings in Hyderabad (including at Mecca Masjid), Bangalore, Jaipur, Ahmedabad and Guwahati to the slaughter of worshippers at Sankat Mochan Temple in Banaras, the terrorists have struck repeatedly with impunity as the Prime Minister spent sleepless nights agonising over the plight of terror suspects and eagerly offered to reward the kith and kin of terrorists killed in action. The UPA began its tenure by dismantling the anti-terror regime put together by the BJP-led NDA Government: The Prevention of Terrorism Act was scrapped; investigations were halted; and, prosecution was slowed down. The mastermind behind the daring attack on Parliament House, Mohammed Afzal Guru, was sentenced to death by the Supreme Court after being prosecuted under POTA. But a dissolute Government headed by an irresolute Prime Minister has failed to carry out the execution, sending out a clear message to India’s enemies: They shall not be punished till such time the Congress is in power. It is, therefore, not surprising that terrorists should have repeatedly attacked our cities, leaving behind a bloody trail of death and destruction. Delhi, the nation’s capital, and Mumbai, the country’s financial capital, have been hit twice, as has been Bangalore, India’s technology capital. As if the bombings of the commuter trains were not enough, the ISI despatched fidayeen for a multiple strike on Mumbai which began on November 26, 2008, and lasted for more than 60 hours. Never before has India been seen to be so helpless in the face of terror.

Terrorism sponsored by Pakistani agencies is only one of the reasons behind the fear that grips the people in cities, towns and villages. The life and limb of the aam admi is equally in danger on account of Maoists who have expanded their theatre of violence to 156 districts across 13 States. The inter-State coordination mechanism put in place by the NDA Government has been dismantled and State Governments have been virtually left to fend for themselves in the face of mounting Maoist hostility. In Jammu & Kashmir, separatists continue to use the services of Pakistani terrorists to promote their agenda of relentless violence. In the North-East, insurgents have remorselessly killed and maimed innocent people. The situation in Assam is particularly of concern as the ULFA, which had been all but smashed during the NDA years, has regrouped and rearmed its cadres, and unleashed a relentless wave of terror. The Congress State Government has done nothing to either prevent this violence or punish ULFA; instead, unconditional talks have been offered to the killers!

Internal security is also imperilled by unchecked illegal immigration across our eastern border. The vulnerability of these illegal immigrants has been time and again exploited by the ISI and its jihadi front organisations as well as local terror cells to carry out bombings and provide logistical support to foreign terrorists. The Supreme Court has described illegal immigration as an act of ‘external aggression’ while striking down the IMDT Act. But the Congress, both at the Centre and in Assam, has tried to circumvent the Supreme Court’s judgement through executive orders. The Gauhati High Court last year lashed out at the State Government for doing nothing to stop the illegal immigration. The High Court highlighted how a Pakistani, who had entered Assam via Bangladesh, contested Assembly elections unchallenged. Vote-bank politics has not only changed the demography of vast stretches of eastern and North-East India but also eroded the authority of the state. India is sitting on a tinderbox. The consequences of this unabated illegal immigration are bound to be disastrous.

In its dying days, the UPA Government has tried to fool the people by tampering with outdated laws and setting up a National Investigating Agency to fight terror. But such half-hearted efforts to calm anger and disquiet following the 26/11 outrage are neither enough nor the right approach to tacking the menace of terrorism.

The BJP will initiate the following measures within 100 days of coming to power:

1. Revive the anti-terror mechanism that has been dismantled by the Congress; improve upon POTA to ensure it is more effective as an instrument of deterrence and a tool to prosecute offenders without innocent people being harassed; and, strengthen the operational role of the National Investigating Agency.

2. Give assent to laws drafted by State Governments for dealing with organised crime and terrorism; encourage other State Governments to adopt similar laws.

3. Launch a massive programme to detect, detain and deport illegal immigrants.

4. Completely revamp the internal and external intelligence agencies and review the existing system of coordination, convergence and dissemination of intelligence inputs. A massive exercise will be undertaken to modernise intelligence agencies so that they are better equipped to use technology and cope with the rapidly changing trends and patterns of terrorism at home and abroad. The National Security Council will be made the hub of all sector-related assessments. It will be accountable for real-time intelligence dissemination; intelligence agencies will be held responsible for lapses. Appointments to intelligence agencies will be on merit and not because of political patronage as has been the system during the Congress years.

5. A Digital Security Agency will be set up to deal with cyber warfare, cyber counterterrorism, and cyber security of national digital assets.

6. State Governments will be provided with all assistance to modernise their respective police forces and equip them with the latest weaponry and communications technology.

This will be done on a mission mode approach. The police are the first responders to any crisis situation. Drawing lessons from experience, police forces will be trained and fully equipped to deal with situations similar to that of Mumbai and in meeting the challenge posed by Maoists and insurgents.

7. Border management will be reviewed and improved. Punitive measures will be introduced to block illegal immigration.

8. India’s vast coastline is virtually unprotected. Coastal security will be strengthened for better patrolling of Indian waters and preventing terrorists from taking the sea route to enter India. A National Maritime Authority will be set up to coordinate coastal security.

9. Special courts will be set up for speedy prosecution of those involved with acts of terrorism. Their trial shall be fair and justice will be done to the victims swiftly.

10. Coercive measures, including diplomacy, will be used to deal with countries which promote cross-border terrorism. India will engage with the world in the global war on terror while not compromising on its domestic interests, primarily protecting citizens from the ravages of terrorism.

11. The Centre will facilitate better inter-State coordination and real-time intelligence-sharing, apart from helping States to raise anti-insurgency forces, to face the threat posed by Maoists. The ‘Chhattisgarh Model’ will be used for counter-Maoist operations. At the same time, every effort will be made to address the social and economic issues that make the ground fertile for Left-wing extremism.

12. Any talks with insurgent groups will be conditional and within the framework of the Constitution. The BJP will send out a simple message, loud and clear, to terrorists and their sponsors: They will have to pay a heavy price for each innocent life lost. Retribution will be swift and exemplary. The authority of the state, which has been diminished by the Congress in pursuit of vote-bank politics, shall be restored.

National Identity Cards for All The BJP will launch an innovative programme to establish a countrywide system of multi-purpose national identity cards so as to ensure national security, correct welfare delivery, accurate tax collection, financial inclusion and voter registration. Voter identity cards, PAN cards, passports, ration cards and BPL cards are already in use though not all with photo identity. The NDA proposes to make it incumbent for every Indian to have a National Identity Card. The programme will be completed in three years. The National Identity Card will contain enough memory and processing capabilities to run multiple applications. Through it the NDA will ensure efficient welfare delivery and tax collection. The card will also be linked to a bank account. All welfare payments, including widow and old age pensions, through the wide range of schemes such as Mother and Child support/ Kisan Credit, Students Assistance and Micro-Credit will be channelised through the National Identity Card. The card will make it possible for individuals to save and borrow money; for farmers to get bank credit, also establish accurate land titles data. The National Identity Card will also strengthen national security by ensuring accurate citizen identity, thus tracking illegal immigration. All financial transactions, purchase of property and access to public services will be possible only on the basis of the National Identity Card which will be made forgery and hacking resistant.

Engaging the world: India’s voice shall be heard 

The BJP believes a resurgent India must get its rightful place in the comity of nations and international institutions. The BJP also believes in a multi-polar world with no nation having overriding powers over others. Towards this end, the BJP in power will engage in meaningful diplomacy with nations across the world on equal terms. The BJP’s foreign policy will be based on the principle of enlightened self-interest.

The BJP desires good relations between India and the USA and will strengthen the India US strategic partnership on the principle of equality. But we will not compromise on either India’s national interest or relations with another friendly country. The BJP will restore the balance that has been disturbed by the UPA Government.

India’s traditional relations with Russia and the Central Asian Republics will be refashioned to keep pace with current realities and derive maximum mutual advantage.

We will pursue friendly relations with the European Union, West Asian countries and South-East Asian nations. It will further strengthen relations with Arab countries and pursue enhanced cooperation with Israel – the two are not inter-linked and both are beneficial for India.

The dialogue process of solving the outstanding border dispute with China, which was initiated by the NDA Government under Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee’s leadership, will be revived. We believe that both India and China can prosper and rise together; increased economic cooperation can contribute to this.

India has a special role to play in the Indian Ocean region and we will pursue this vigorously. The BJP believes in forging enduring friendly and cooperative relations with India’s neighbours. We also believe that political stability, progress and peace in India’s neighbourhood are essential for South Asia’s growth and development: SAARC is a good platform to promote these goals.

But the BJP will be guided solely by national interest while dealing with India’s neighbours. Towards this end, its decisions and actions in power will be determined by the following: Pakistan: There can be no ‘comprehensive dialogue’ for peace unless Pakistan a) dismantles the terrorist infrastructure on territory under its control; b) actively engages in prosecuting terror elements and organisations; c) puts a permanent, verifiable end to its practice of using cross-border terrorism as an instrument of state policy; d) stops using the territory of third countries to launch terror attacks on India; and, e) hands over to India individuals wanted for committing crimes on Indian soil.

Nepal: The BJP will re-craft India’s Nepal policy to rid it of the UPA’s biases that have influenced India’s response to events in Nepal with which our country shares a common civilisational and cultural history. India-Nepal relations must be based on friendship, mutual cooperation and harmony of interests. Towards this end, existing arrangements will be reviewed and revised bearing in mind mutual interests and benefits on the basis of dialogue. The BJP would like to see Nepal emerge as a stable, prosperous country, and will strive to strengthen age-old fraternal ties.

Bhutan: Existing close relations with Bhutan will be strengthened.

Bangladesh: The BJP will pro-actively engage the Government of Bangladesh on issues of mutual assistance and benefit. A friendly Government in Dhaka is in India’s interest.

Sri Lanka: The BJP believes that Sri Lanka has the right to deal with terrorism on its soil. At the same time, the political, economic and human rights of Sri Lanka’s Tamil minority community must be protected by the Government in Colombo. The BJP will pursue a robust relationship with Sri Lanka and regain the initiative that has been lost during the last five years.

Afghanistan: The BJP believes that India has an important role in helping the people of Afghanistan to rebuild their country and stabilise their society, as well as secure their lives from the depredations of the Taliban operating from Pakistani sanctuaries. The BJP will further build upon India-Afghanistan relations and work in close association with the international community to ensure a stable, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.

Mother India’s Children Abroad

The BJP will maintain close contacts with people of Indian origin who have settled on foreign shores. It has been the consistent policy of the BJP to promote the interests of people of Indian origin living abroad. During the NDA years, special efforts were made to revive and revitalise the ties between Pravasi Bharatiyas and their ancestral land by institutionalising the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, honouring achievers and introducing the PIO card. Those efforts will be given a further boost.

Defending India: No compromise, no concession

The Indian Army, Air Force and Navy need to be strengthened in view of rapidly changing regional and global realities. Tragically, the services have been ignored by the Congress and failure to address the concerns of the Army, Air Force and Navy has bred undesirable discontent. The BJP will address all pending issues immediately. It will be guided by the following solemn commitments while dealing with the defence of India:

1. The long-pending acquisition of military hardware will be expedited through absolutely transparent means in a time-bound manner.

2. Budget allocations for defence forces will be spent without being allowed to lapse. The criminal negligence of the defence forces by the UPA Government has resulted in nearly Rs 24,000 crore by way of budgetary allocations being allowed to lapse over five years. This not only endangers the lives of our soldiers but also the security of the nation.

3. Our forces are performing a service to the nation and deserve better pay and privileges.

Towards this end, the BJP is committed to the following measures: a. The pending issues of pay and privileges will be revisited and resolved to the satisfaction of the defence forces. The modalities for setting up a separate Pay Commission for the forces will be expedited; b. All personnel of the Army, Air Force and Navy, as also paramilitary forces, will be exempt from paying income tax on their salaries and perquisites; c. The honorarium for winners of gallantry awards like Pram Vir Chakra, which is abysmally low at Rs 500 to Rs 3,000, will be increased ten-fold to Rs 5,000 to Rs 30,000. This will be done with retrospective effect; the honorarium will be tax free. d. The principle of one rank, one pension will be implemented; e. Incentive-based steps will be taken to make joining the defence services an exciting proposition for young men and women to overcome the shortage of officers; and, f. Incentives will be offered to State Governments for ensuring honourable settlement of retired personnel of the defence services.

4. The present shortage of defence personnel at all levels will be met by making the Services an attractive career option. This would include competitive pay and privileges, and pension benefits. This task will be completed in a time-bound manner. 5. The capacities of Defence Research and Development Organisation will be enhanced. The PPP route will be explored for conventional defence production bearing in mind the nation’s needs and to make India a competitive player in the global market by 2020.

Independent strategic nuclear programme: We will assert India’s sovereignty

The BJP believes that India’s strategic nuclear programme has been deeply compromised by the Congress. The gains of Pokhran-II and subsequent development have been frittered away for gains that have accrued to those who wish to see India’s nuclear programme to be contained, rolled back and eventually dismantled.

The BJP will reverse this drift. India’s indigenous thorium technology programme will be expedited and given all financial assistance, correcting the grievous wrong done by the UPA Government. India needs nuclear energy, but not at the cost of our national strategic interests. The Congress has fooled the people of India by selling the over-hyped India-US Civil Nuclear Cooperation Agreement as an absolute necessity and how it will help light up people’s homes. It has done so by suppressing two crucial facts. First, as the CAG has pointed out, the UPA Government did not make the smallest effort to tap India’s own nuclear fuel supplies. Had it done so, our reactors would have produced many times more power than at present. Second, nuclear power is tremendously expensive and not affordable for the aam admi. The India-US nuclear deal, in the final analysis, is not about empowering India but disempowering India by making us dependent on American supplies and tying us to discriminatory regimes from which Pakistan is free.

The BJP will honour India’s commitments to prevent proliferation. But it will pursue an independent nuclear policy based on the following:

1. All options will be kept open and all steps will be taken that are necessary for the technological advancement of India’s civil and military nuclear programmes.

2. Maintain a credible minimum deterrent that is in tune with changing realities.

3. Seek cross-party consensus before agreeing to any control regime, including CTBT, FMCR and MTCR.

In view of the uncalled for and regrettable secrecy with which the Congress and the Prime Minister dealt with the India-US nuclear deal, the BJP proposes to introduce an amendment to the Constitution to make it mandatory for Government to seek Parliament’s approval/ratification by two-thirds majority before signing any bilateral or multilateral agreement that impinges on India’s strategic programmes, territorial integrity and economic interest.

Food security: We will make India hunger-free 

The BJP views food security as integral to national security. The spectre of a looming food crisis haunts the developing world as never before. With the agriculture sector suffering on account of the Congress’ gross negligence, India faces a real threat of food scarcity. With India becoming a net importer of food under Congress rule, there is genuine concern about food security. Three factors have contributed to increasing food scarcity and the resultant sense of growing insecurity among the masses. First, the real income of workers and farmers has not kept pace with the rising cost of food, thus reducing their purchasing power. Second, the public distribution system has been severely crippled by the Congress-led Government which has been more interested in importing food grains and selling them at a high price than in securing the needs of the people. Third, with an additional 55 million people pushed below the poverty line over the last five years, there is widespread malnourishment. The economic recession has only worsened the situation and made it grimmer, especially for workers in the unorganised sector.

The BJP believes people have the right to food. To ensure food security for all and eliminate hunger, we will: 1. Provide 35 kg of rice or wheat every month to BPL families at Rs 2 per kg under an improved and expanded Antyodaya Anna Yojana. This will be available against ‘Food Coupons’ redeemable at both PDS and private outlets.

2. Allocate more funds for expanding, universalising and improving the functioning of the Public Distribution System.

3. Preventing families from slipping below the poverty line.

4. Setting up community kitchens in extremely impoverished areas with the help of NGOs through shared funding.

5. Aggressively addressing the problem of widespread malnutrition, especially by expanding the scope of the existing mid-day meal scheme.

6. Encouraging the production of cereals and discouraging the conversion of fertile farm land for dubious industrial projects.

7. Ensuring a sufficient level of food stocks are maintained to meet any exigencies due to possible global food crisis which could be severely debilitating and make imports prohibitively expensive, if not impossible.

Energy security: We will protect India from future crises 

India cannot afford to lose any more time on securing its energy requirements. The Congress’s response to this issue has been episodic at best, often resulting in India failing to secure its energy interests even as other countries in the neighbourhood, most notably China, have spared no effort to single-mindedly pursue the goal of securing their energy needs for the present and future.

At present India is largely dependent on imported oil and gas to meet its energy demands, especially demand for power although our per capita power consumption is only a sixth of the world average. Sixty-seven per cent of our power supply comes from fossil fuels, of which 70 per cent is imported. With market fluctuation and manipulation, as it happened in 2008, this makes us vulnerable to external factors.

The BJP proposes to invest heavily in developing non-fossil fuel-based clean energy sources, especially for electricity production. Our goal will be to add at least 120,000 MW of power over the next five years, with 20 per cent of it coming from renewable sources. Similar emphasis will be placed on developing alternatives to petrol and diesel to lessen the burden of imported oil and gas as well as meet the challenges of climate change. Adequate support will be extended for developing hybrid technologies and their applications. There will be special emphasis on developing renewal energy sources, especially solar energy, wind energy and run-on-the-river technology, and bio-fuel. Innovation will be rewarded.

Impetus will be provided for the production of non-conventional energy by enabling people and firms to bank it in the power grid and draw it at the time of their need.

Reviving the national economy: From recession to job-generating growth 

The UPA Government’s mismanagement of the national economy and fiscal indiscipline has resulted in frittering away the tremendous gains of the NDA years. The slowing down of India’s growth has had an adverse impact on people across the country. To control inflation, the UPA Government drained liquidity out of the system, which, in turn, hobbled both the organised and unorganised sectors. It is now desperately trying to reverse that flawed policy, but clearly such half-hearted measures are not sufficient. The situation calls for determined, direct and visible Government intervention. The BJP plans to do so through robust policies aimed at revitalising the economy and placing India on the path of employment-generating growth coupled with rapid development. Towards this end, the BJP will take the following measures: 1. Put in place a low tax, low interest regime so that people have more money and their purchasing power increases, which in turn will serve as an impetus for the economy. 2. Exempt income up to Rs 3 lakh from Income Tax. Women and senior citizens will receive an additional exemption benefit of Rs 50,000. 3. Income of all senior citizens by way of pension will be exempt from Income Tax. 4. To incentivise savings, all interest earned on bank deposits other than by corporates and those who have business income shall be exempt from tax. 5. Dispense with clubbing of agricultural income with other sources of income for determining tax liability on other income. 6. CST will be abolished and GST will be rationalised between 12 and 14 per; FBT will go. ESOPS and MAT tax regime will be rationalised and made equitable. 7. Firm action will be initiated to minimise the presence of black money in the national economy. We will take determined steps to bring back the money (estimated at Rs 25,00,000 crore and Rs 75,00,000 crore) illegally stashed in Swiss bank accounts and tax havens, and use it for infrastructure development, housing, health and social welfare schemes. 8. Arrest the loss of jobs and reverse the trend of joblessness which is far worse than unemployment by making massive public sector investments in job-generating infrastructure programmes, especially building of roads and highways, and linking of rivers.

5. Hindustan Diamond Corporation will be provided full support to help the diamond industry tide over the crisis caused by the global economic slump. It will provide raw diamonds to the cutting and polishing units and bank them for future trade.

6. Highways construction, which got a boost during the NDA years, will once again feature high on Government’s agenda. We will build between 15 and 20 km of highways every day.

7. The Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, the largest rural connectivity programme initiated by the NDA Government, will be fully implemented in the first three years.

8. Bring down interest rates for housing loans so that housing becomes affordable, accessible and revives the stalled real estate sector which has witnessed huge job losses.

9. Enhance the capabilities of the manufacturing sector by easing credit availability.

10. Promote SMEs and the retail sector which can generate a large number of jobs and make a meaningful contribution to the national economy. The criteria for classifying SMEs will be reviewed.

11. Introduce reforms to improve productivity and greater capital formation.

12. Give a boost to tourism by selecting 50 tourist destinations and investing heavily in their infrastructure and communications. Tourist arrivals will be doubled.

13. Impose countervailing restrictions on foreign companies operating in India, especially in the services sector, which, on account of domestic laws of their respective countries, have introduced restrictions on hiring Indian employees with valid work visas.

14. Regulatory bodies which are supposed to monitor the performance and balance sheets of companies will be strengthened to prevent corporate fraud that dents India’s image as well as has a direct impact on the market and investors.

15. Make India proud of Indian products, and make Indian brands globally competitive.

16. Ensure a decent level of consumption for all without encouraging consumerism.

Urban India: Looking ahead to the future 

As the national economy grows and jobs are generated, there will be a matching increase in the pressures on urban centres. Apart from assisting State Governments to renew and revive existing cities and replace festering slums with hygienic, affordable living quarters, the BJP will review and recast the Urban Development Policy. We will specifically do the following, bearing in mind the challenges of the future:

1. In pursuit of the principle of ‘Shelter for All’, 10 lakh dwelling units for the poor will be constructed every year.

2. Fifteen new cities, with world class infrastructure facilities and amenities, will be built in five years. 

3. For existing urban centres, basic infrastructure facilities and amenities of water, drainage, roads, electricity, environment and solid waste management will be enhanced for a clean and healthy city life. 

4. Peripheral areas of cities will be developed on the basis of ‘rurban’ concept to minimise migration: The physical infrastructure facilities will be that of urban areas but the heart and soul will be of rural areas.

5. GIS-based mapping of urban properties and title certification will be concluded.

6. Practical, pragmatic measures will be adopted to deal with emerging urban problems like vehicular traffic overload.

Agriculture: Debt-free farmer, prosperous India 

The pitiful state of our farm sector is best exemplified by debt-ridden farmers committing suicide. The UPA Government, while actively promoting the import of food grains, has callously ignored the plight of India’s farmers. There are three immediate concerns which will be addressed by the BJP in a time-bound manner: Ensuring assured income for farmers; freeing farmers from the burden of mounting debts; and, increasing public investment in agriculture. Everything can wait, but not agriculture. To make India’s farmer debt-free, the BJP will:

1. Waive agricultural loans.

2. Set up a commission to study the entire gamut of farmers’ loans and come up with an actionable solution to the deepening crisis within six months.

3. Set a maximum ceiling of 4 per cent interest for agricultural loans to farmers from banks.

4. Introduce a pension scheme for aged and helpless farmers.

5. Make agriculture profitable by reducing the cost of inputs, enhancing yields and reviewing the present method of determining prices.

6. Implement a Farm Income Insurance Scheme through which both price and produce will be insured. In the event of loss of crops, farmers will be compensated under this scheme so that they do not suffer any loss of income.

7. Promote nature-friendly cultivation and incentivise organic farming to arrest soil quality depletion. Special marketing assistance for organic produce.

8. Introduce value addition schemes to reduce wastage and invest in food-processing units which will generate jobs for rural youth.

9. Create irrigation facilities for an additional 35 million hectares of land in five years: This will generate rural jobs as well as benefit farmers. Drip irrigation will be promoted along with better water management and use of check dams.

10. Ensure quality power, seeds and other inputs.

11. Heavily invest funds in agriculture to reverse the trend set by the Congress-led UPA and make the farm sector an equal engine of growth along with industry and the services sector.

12. Strengthen National Rural Bank and allied services.

13. Promote horticulture, floriculture, pisciculture and poultry for generating additional jobs and supplementing incomes.

14. Create additional grazing land and encourage the maintenance of ponds and water bodies.

GM Seeds: No genetically modified seed will be allowed for cultivation without full scientific data on long-term effects on soil, production and biological impact on consumers. All food and food products produced with genetically modified seeds will be branded as ‘GM Food’.

Land acquisition for infrastructure, farmers interests will be protected 

The Central and State Governments, for long, have acquired land, through an opaque process, to hand it over to private parties under the umbrella of ‘public purpose’. The UPA Government has approved 572 Special Economic Zones that cover 50,000 acres, three times the size of Singapore. This is clearly absurd and spells disaster for the farm sector. The BJP will adopt a National Land Use Policy which will protect the interests of farmers. Its implementation will be monitored by a National Land Use Authority which will work with State Land Use Authorities to regulate and facilitate land management. The powers and functions of the National Land Use Authority will be similar to those of other regulatory bodies. The BJP will bring about amendments to existing laws to rectify anomalies pertaining to land acquisition. Farmers will be compensated at market rates for any land acquired for infrastructure purposes. The BJP will not allow the conversion of fertile farmland for industrial/ commercial projects or Special Economic Zones.

The entire issue of Special Economic Zones and acquisition of land for industrial use will be addressed after a careful scrutiny of the Parliamentary Standing Committee’s report and factoring in the need to protect the farm sector and enhance food production.

International Trade Agreements 

The BJP shall fight against the protectionist trend which is emerging in some developed countries. We will safeguard the country’s interests in all bilateral and multilateral trade agreements by avoiding to accept any new unilateral or less than reciprocal commitments. Our Government will renegotiate all such past commitments that are inconsistent with national interests, especially to ensure food security and affordable health care. We will not hesitate to roll back any concessions and facilities not reciprocated by the counterparts. The BJP will safeguard the interests of our vast technical manpower and ensure maximum market access in future agreements depending upon the offers made by the trade partners.

Retail Trade 

The BJP understands the critical importance of retail trade in the context of employment and services provided by them, and thus favours a dominant role for the unincorporated sector in retail trade. Towards this end, it will not allow foreign investment in the retail sector. After agriculture, the retail sector is the largest employer of nearly four crore people.

We will:

1. Adopt all necessary measures to safeguard the interests of small and tiny retail vendors.

2. Ensure availability of working capital needs for such vendors through credit at not more than four per cent interest.

3. Study the feasibility of a slab-based ‘Compound Tax’ for traders to free them from needless harassment and end corruption.

4. Set up an empowered committee to recommend welfare measures, including a pension scheme, for small traders.

Labour: The BJP will holistically address the long-pending issue of labour reforms, bearing in mind the long-term interests of the working class. It will do so through close consultation with representative bodies of labour and employers. We are committed to ensure the following:

1. Making secret ballot compulsory for trade union elections, by suitably amending the Industrial Disputes Act.

2. Launching a training programme for trade unions to play an effective and positive role.

3. Setting up a ‘Workers Bank’ to deal with the banking requirements of labour in the organised and unorganised sectors.

4. Ensuring adequate compensation for any labour that may be retrenched, with the first option being redeployment.

5. Setting up a National Child Labour Commission.

6. For labour in the unorganised sector, revise minimum wages; expand safety net. Cooperative Sector 

Every effort will be made to encourage the cooperative sector. Towards this end, the BJP will do the following:

1. Exempt cooperative banks from paying income tax.

2. Frame a model law for cooperative societies for nationwide implementation.

3. Amend the Multi-State Cooperative Act to remove current lacunae and anomalies.

4. Set up a Central regulatory authority for cooperative bodies.

Consumer rights 

The rights of consumers will be further strengthened. The BJP will set up an experts committee to deal with the following issues:

1. Setting up of services specific arbitration courts to settle consumer disputes.

2. Creating a mechanism for whereby consumers can participate in a structured consultative process with Government.

3. Making consumer product labelling more content information specific.

Youth power: Empowering young India 

India’s population, unlike that of Western nations, is getting younger by the day. More than half of our citizens are aged 25 and below; nearly two-thirds are aged 35 and below. The aspirations and ambitions of the youth are fuelled by rising literacy and awareness levels. It is the Government’s duty to help them achieve these aspirations and ambitions, and make them capable of taking on all challenges and converting them into opportunities. The BJP will fulfil this duty by framing policies in consonance with the concerns of ‘Young India’ and aimed at unleashing the abilities of the youth, who will be the driving force of this nation’s emergence as an awesome knowledge power. The BJP’s Manifesto has been drafted keeping the aspirations and ambitions of the youth in mind.

We propose to review, revive and re-launch the National Service Scheme and National Cadet Corps as effective vehicles to involve the youth in nation-building and reinforcing their national spirit. Their participation in the decision-making process and decision-making bodies will be actively encouraged. 

The BJP also proposes to launch a unique ‘National Knowledge Incubation Programme’.

This will involve the setting up of ‘Incubation Centres’ for meritorious students from all strata of society. To begin with, at least one per cent of the best brains will be deployed for mentoring at the ‘Incubation Centres’. Adequate resources will be provided for the programme. A National Student Bank will be set up to meet the banking requirements, including study loans, of students, at 4% rate of interest.

Education for all: Literate India, powerful India 

The BJP will give education its due place in governance to achieve social, economic, cultural and technical advancement. Education will be the Government’s instrument to reduce poverty, promote health, protect the environment and advance gender equality. Central allocation to education shall be raised to six per cent of the GDP. Our goal is to spend nine per cent of GDP on education by involving the private sector.

A National Education Commission will be constituted to propose a comprehensive policy for the 21st century. The content and process of education shall be made responsive to the needs of the times and the aspirations of the young. The existing digital divide will be removed by extending the outreach of information technology to every child.

Particular emphasis shall be laid on value education, inclusive education, education of the migratory tribes and other deprived groups and all those who need additional support. The examination system will be reviewed for extensive reform.

The following are the highlights of the BJP’s agenda to ensure education for all: School Education 

1. The success story of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, launched by the NDA in 2002, shall be strengthened, extended and concretised further in quality, content and support systems.

2. Implementation of the mid-day meal scheme shall be revitalised on modern management lines. Akshaya Patra Scheme will serve as a model for this purpose.

3. Effective steps shall be put in place to provide skills acquisition.

4. Primary school timings and vacations shall be flexible and decided upon by the local community and the Parents-Teachers Associations.

5. Universalisation of secondary education shall be speedily implemented. Special emphasis will be given to girls’ education at the secondary level.

6. All assistance will be provided for a national madarsa modernisation programme.

7. Close linkages between school education and higher education shall be built into the system.

Vocational education 

1. Widespread network of providing skill orientation and vocational training shall be established. Provisions for certification of skills acquired traditionally or through private initiatives shall be made.

2. Additional structures and facilities shall be created at secondary stage to provide generic vocational skills to every child who is willing to do so.

3. A fresh countrywide initiative shall be launched to bring about an attitudinal transformation among parents and communities towards skill development and vocational education.

4. Industry shall be persuaded to play a greater role than at present to prepare skilled manpower, which will be of mutual benefit.

Higher Education 

1. Institutions of higher learning shall be given full autonomy, coupled with accountability, in real practice.

2. Access to higher education shall be expanded without any compromise on quality and content. Private initiatives shall be encouraged within the broad educational priority parameters and provisions for focus groups.

3. Manpower planning shall be put in place and made active and effective. Higher education prepares top-level manpower for every sector. Hence, its quality and relevance have a multiplier effect.

New National Policy on Education 

Immediate steps will be initiated to appoint a National Commission on Education, the report of which shall lead to the formulation of a new National Policy on Education that will replace the NPE-1986/92. This Commission shall undertake continuous envisioning of educational plans, strategies methods, material and research to make India a knowledge power and develop several institutions of higher learning and research as centres of international pursuit of knowledge and learning.

Ragging to be made a criminal offence with stiff punishment 

The BJP will frame a law to deal with the menace of ragging. All cases of ragging will be tried in fast-track courts. School/college/university authorities will be held culpable for failing to implement the law.

Science and technology: Over the moon and beyond 

The BJP in power will aggressively promote science and technology for the well-being of all citizens and India’s progress as well as its emergence as force on the global scene. We believe our science and technology system has to be infused with new vitality if it is to play a decisive and beneficial role in advancing the well-being of all sections of our society.

Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee had promised Chandrayan – India’s mission to the Moon – and it has been fulfilled by our scientists. We now propose to take the mission a step forward:

Chandrayan – II will see Indians stepping on the Moon in the next five years. 

We will take India into the ‘Super Computer’ era to enhance the nation’s defence capabilities and scientific research and development.

The BJP recognises the central role of science and technology in raising the quality of life of the people of the country, particularly of the disadvantaged sections of society, in creating wealth for all, in making India globally competitive, in utilising natural resources in a sustainable manner, in protecting the environment and ensuring national security. Our objectives will be aimed at:

1. Ensuring food, agricultural, nutritional, environmental, water, health and energy security of the people on a sustainable basis.

2. Mounting a direct and sustained effort on the alleviation of poverty, enhancing livelihood security, removal of hunger and malnutrition, reduction of drudgery and regional imbalances, both rural and urban, and generation of employment, by using scientific and technological capabilities along with our traditional knowledge pool.

3. Building and maintaining centres of excellence, which will raise the level of work in selected areas to the highest international standards along with creating suitable employment opportunities.

4. Promoting the empowerment of women in all science and technology activities and ensuring their full and equal participation.

5. Providing necessary autonomy and freedom of functioning for all academic and R&D institutions, while ensuring that science and technology enterprises are fully committed to their social responsibilities and commitments.

6. Accomplishing national strategic and security-related objectives by using the latest advances in science and technology.

7. Encouraging research and innovation in areas of relevance for the economy and society, particularly by promoting close and productive interaction between private and public institutions. Sectors such as agriculture (particularly soil and water management, human and animal nutrition, fisheries), water, health, education, industry, energy including renewable energy, communication and transportation would be accorded highest priority. Key leverage technologies such as information technology, biotechnology and materials science and technology would be given special importance.

8. Establishing an Intellectual Property Rights regime which maximises the incentives for the generation and protection of intellectual property by all types of inventors.

9. Ensuring, in an era in which information is key to the development of science and technology, that all efforts are made to have high-speed access to information, both in quality and quantity, at affordable costs; and also create digitised, valid and usable content of Indian origin.

10. Encouraging research and application to meet the challenges of climate change and for forecasting, prevention and mitigation of natural hazards, particularly, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, drought and landslides.

11. Promoting international science and technology cooperation towards achieving the goals of national development and security, and make it a key element of our international relations.

The BJP will also focus on the following: 

1. New funding mechanism for promotion of basic research in science, medical, agricultural and engineering institutions.

2. Promotion of innovation by creating a comprehensive national system of innovation.

3. Achieving synergy between industry and scientific research. Autonomous technology transfer organisations will be created as associate organisations of universities and national laboratories to transfer the know-how generated by them to industry. Industry will be encouraged to adopt or support educational and research institutions to help direct science and technology endeavours towards tangible industrial goals.

4. Indigenous knowledge, based on our long and rich tradition will be further developed and harnessed for the purpose of wealth and employment generation.

5. Intellectual Property Rights have to be viewed not as a self-contained and distinct domain, but rather as an effective policy instrument relevant to wide-ranging socioeconomic, technological and political concepts. The generation and fullest protection of competitive intellectual property from Indian R&D programmes will be encouraged and promoted.

Science and technology, we believe, should be used to build a new and resurgent India that continues to maintain its strong democratic and spiritual traditions, that remains secure not only militarily but also socially and economically. Our science and technology policy will be framed and implemented so as to be in harmony with our worldview of the larger human family. We will ensure that science and technology truly uplifts the Indian people and indeed all of humanity.

Information Technology: India@e-superpower 

The NDA Government had made ICT one of the major areas of policy thrust. This was one of our achievements and we propose to pursue ICT with same vigour and purpose. A separate IT Vision Document has been issued, containing specific details of the policies the BJP proposes to pursue.

The following are the main highlights of our IT Vision Document:

1. Generate 1.2 crore new IT-enabled jobs in rural areas.

2. Make computers affordable for students.

3. All schools and colleges to have Internet-enabled education.

4. Launch a National Digital Highway Development Project to bring affordable broadband Internet connectivity to every village.

5. Every Indian citizen to have a bank account; welfare funds to be deposited directly into end beneficiary’s bank account to eliminate corruption.

6. Video-conferencing to be made affordable.

7. Internet users to equal mobile subscribers.

8. Primary Health Centres to be linked to the National Telemedicine Service Network.

9. Massive expansion in the use of IT in agriculture, rural development, SMEs, retail trade, and informal and unorganised sectors of the economy.

10. National e-Governance Plan to cover every Government office from the Centre to the Panchayats. The ‘E Gram, Vishwa Gram’ scheme in Gujarat to be implemented nationwide.

11. All post offices to be converted into IT-enabled Multi-Service Outlets. All telephone booths to be upgraded to Internet kiosks.

12. e-Bhasha: National Mission for Promotion of IT in Indian Languages.

13. Special focus to bring women, SC/STs, OBCs and other weaker sections of society within the ambit of IT-enabled development.

14. Use of IT for the protection of India’s priceless cultural and artistic heritage.

15. Government to promote ‘open standard’ and ‘open source’ software.

16. Domestic IT hardware industry to be aggressively promoted to minimise dependence on imports.

17. Domestic hosting industry to be promoted to minimise international bandwith charges.

Promotion of sports: Making youth healthy, competitive

To make the nation a strong player in diverse international sports, the BJP will invest in every sporting activity. This is an essential element of achieving our goal of making India a developed nation in the sports world within five years. Towards this end, we will:

1. Introduce sports as a compulsory part of school curriculum. Towards this end, sports infrastructure and facilities in schools, colleges and universities will be expanded with adequate provision of resources by the Ministry of Human Resource Development and State Governments. Rs 5,000 crore will be allocated for the purpose to be released through the UGC, Central Educational Boards / Sangathans and State Governments for speedy implementation of sports and youth development activities.

2. Create an effective National Sports Talent Search System so that extraordinary sporting talent is identified at a very young age. Such promising boys and girls will be selected for special training. The existing rural sports programme and National Women Sports Festival will be broadened to reach every village and to identify talent for nurturing and excellence development.

3. Ensure sports training is world class by appointing excellent coaches, training of sports persons abroad and upgrading the skills of existing coaches. International training and competition exposure programme will be prepared for which an amount of Rs 1,000 crore will be allocated per year.

4. Offer a secure and attractive career plan both in public and private sector for medal winners in National Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games and Olympic Games. The present reservation of jobs only in Groups C and D categories under Central Government Rule will be suitably revised to provide employment to meritorious sportspersons in Groups A and B categories also. Similarly, all public sector undertakings will be advised to employ international medal winners in Groups A and B categories.

5. Encourage business houses to set aside some resources for the development of sports.

They will be offered tax incentives for creating sports infrastructure and sponsoring sports events at district, State, national and international level.

6. Make the management of various agencies involved in sports promotion more efficient and accountable. All these institutions will be made to recognise that our sportspersons are the most important entity in our strategy to achieve excellence in sports. Hence, transparency will be ensured in their functioning.

7. Amend guidelines for the MPLAD scheme so that MPs can make their funds available for promotion of sports and adventure activities.

8. Mandate all new housing colonies to include sports facilities.

9. Enhance Plan allocation for sports development and encourage State Governments to fully discharge their responsibility in the promotion of sports.

Women’s empowerment: Nari shakti key to inclusive development 

The BJP’s political adversaries talk of women’s empowerment but have done nothing to truly empower them. The Congress had promised to introduce the law for women’s reservation in State Assemblies and Parliament. But it had neither the conviction to introduce the legislation nor the courage to stand up to its allies who are opposed to the political empowerment of women. The BJP remains committed to 33 per cent political representation for women, and shall act on this after coming to power.

There are other key areas where the BJP will focus its attention to empower women: 

1. Introduce the Ladli Lakshmi Scheme, which has been a big success in Madhya Pradesh, at the national level to encourage girls to attend school up to at least pre-college level. Under this scheme, each girl child from disadvantaged families will receive Rs 2,000 on reaching Class 6; Rs 4,000 in Class 9; Rs 7,500 in Class 11; and, Rs 1,10,000 on completing 21 years of age. From Class 6 onwards, she will get a stipend of Rs 2,400 per year till such time she remains in school.

2. Adopt the Bhamashah Vitteeya Sashaktikaran Evam Naari Samriddhi Yojana, conceived by the erstwhile BJP Government in Rajasthan, to financially empower women from Below Poverty Line, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes families and those of small and marginal farmers. Under this scheme, bank accounts will be opened for the beneficiary women and they alone will be able to operate the accounts through specially designed smart cards. An initial deposit of Rs 1,500 will be made in the bank accounts.

The scheme also envisages job creation through opening of banks in remote areas and counsellors to help the beneficiaries to manage their accounts.

3. A national programme will be launched, in cooperation with State Governments, to provide bicycles to girls from Below Poverty Line Families who attend school.

4. Review and revamp women’s participation in local self-governance, especially Panchayati Raj bodies.

5. Adopt a National Policy on Women’s Economic Empowerment to ensure every woman has access to livelihood and enhance the income of all categories of working women. Gender discrimination in wages, whether in organised or unorganised sector, will be eliminated.

6. Remove all remaining gender disparities in property rights, marital rights and cohabitation rights.

7. Support for programmes like Swavalamban and ‘STEP’ (Support to Training and Employment Programme), which promote self-employment and entrepreneurship for women through self-help groups, will be greatly enhanced. Technical and management services for those engaged in handicrafts, food-processing, handloom, garments, etc, will be strengthened. Added focus will be provided for implementing these programmes in the North-East, Jammu & Kashmir, and areas affected by Maoism.

8. Enterprises promoted by women, or employing a large number of women, will be given ‘fast track’ facilitation. They will get loans at preferential rates of interest.

9. Laws to check female foeticide, dowry, child marriage, trafficking, rape and family violence will be reviewed, strengthened and strictly enforced. The CrPC will be amended to ensure the rights of victims of rape are not diminished and the guilty are not able to tamper with evidence or escape the law of the land. A special programme will be launched, in cooperation with State Governments, to ensure full security for women.

10. Programmes aimed at helping indigent women and women in distress will be strengthened with the cooperation of State Governments.

11. Every effort will be made to expand and improve upon the existing network of working women’s hostels.

12. The current extremely low salaries of Anganwadi workers and helpers, who are the backbone of the Integrated Child Development Scheme, will be doubled.

Protecting Women’s Rights 

Article 44 of the Constitution of India lists Uniform Civil Code as one of the Directive Principles of State Policy. There cannot be real gender equality till such time India adopts a Uniform Civil Code which protects the rights of all women. The BJP, as a first step towards this constitutionally mandated direction, will set up a Commission to draft a Uniform Civil Code, drawing upon the best traditions and harmonising them with the modern times. The Commission will also study reforms towards gender equality in other countries, including Islamic countries.

Dalits, OBCs & economically weaker sections of society: We will ensure social justice and harmony 

The BJP is committed to the principle of Social Justice (Samajik Nyay) and Samajik Samarasata (Social Harmony). Instead of pursuing identity politics which do not fetch benefits to Dalits, OBCs and other deprived sections of our society, the BJP will focus on tangible development and empowerment. 

The BJP will boost opportunities for entrepreneurship and commerce among Dalits, OBCs and other deprived sections of our society so that India’s social diversity is fairly reflected in its economic diversity.

Atrocities against Dalits, Tribals and weaker sections of society will be firmly dealt with. 

The extremely backward communities need urgent Government assistance. Special efforts will be made to reach out to them. In contrast to the UPA years when an additional 55 million people were pushed below the poverty line, the BJP will strive to bring families above the poverty line through aggressive policies and targeted programmes.

A mission-mode approach will be adopted for providing the following to deprived communities: 

1. Special educational facilities through Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan.

2. Water, health, sanitation and hygiene for all families/habitations.

A special component will be created in all development schemes to benefit the deprived sections of society. An ‘Extremely Backward Communities Development Bank’ will be set up for promoting skill enhancement through learn-and-earn schemes for their uplift.

The BJP will introduce education and job quotas on the basis of economic criteria for all economically weaker sections of society other than Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and OBCs, who will continue to enjoy quota benefits.

Tribal development: Long-term strategy for lasting welfare 

It is a proven fact that incremental and piecemeal attempts for the development of tribals have not helped. Hence, the BJP will adopt a comprehensive, all-encompassing long-term strategy to empower tribals and ensure their welfare. We will draw upon the experience of our Governments in Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh which have successfully implemented tribal welfare and development schemes.

We will initiate a Van Bandhu Kalyan Yojana at the national level, to be overseen by a ‘Tribal Development Authority’. This scheme will focus on:

1. Setting up new schools and colleges, as also engineering colleges, polytechnics, agri-engineering colleges, nursing schools, veterinary schools.

2. Upgrading housing, water and health facilities.

3. Electrification of tribal hamlets and provision of all-weather roads.

4. Initiating new economic activities related to agriculture and agri-processing, horticulture, etc.

5. Promoting dairy-based activities.

6. Creating employment opportunities by promoting bamboo-processing units and small scale units.

7. Preventing tribal land from being alienated.

8. Facilitating access to minor forest produce and creating a network of rural markets.

9. Establishing a National Research Centre for the preservation of tribal culture and languages.

10. Providing adequate funds for tribal welfare and development.

Senior citizens: Care and respect for the elderly 

The elderly deserve full support of both Government and society. The BJP is committed to the welfare of senior citizens. A separate department will be created in the Social Welfare Ministry to deal with senior citizens’ issues. We will:

1. Review pensions and pension policies to ensure benefits keep pace with the actual cost of living.

2. Study the feasibility of introducing higher interest rates on savings for all citizens above 60 years of age.

3. Rationalise travel concessions.

4. Introduce a health insurance policy that does not discriminate against the elderly.

5. Income tax benefits for senior citizens will be made available at 60 years, instead of 65 years as is the practice at present.

6. Review existing provisions of old age pension scheme and expand its application.

Care of the disabled: Integrating the differently-abled 

Disabled people constitute five per cent of India’s population. Years of neglect has delayed their integration into the social mainstream. Their welfare and rehabilitation is integral to NDA’s vision of a caring society and a responsive government. The BJP will:

1. Ensure and implement the right for education and vocational training for the disabled.

2. Ensure disabled-friendly access to public utilities, public buildings, and transport.

3. Ensure maximum economic independence of the disabled by creating more income generation models for the disabled.

4. Facilitate establishment of an Institute of Vocational Training for the Disabled in every district with public-private partnership.

5. Provide special incentive for the adoption of a disabled child.

6. Support voluntary organizations working for the care of the disabled.

Minority communities: Healthy diet of development 

The BJP repudiates the division of Indian society along communal lines which has been fostered by the Congress and the Left in pursuit of their vote-bank politics. Categorisation of communities as ‘minorities’ perpetuates notions of imagined discrimination and victimhood; it reinforces the perception of the ‘minority’ identity as separate from the national identity. The BJP remains committed to a common Indian identity that transcends community, caste and gender, with every Indian an equal participant in the building of a prosperous nation and an equal beneficiary of that prosperity. Pluralism is a sine qua non for any democracy and the BJP cherishes the diversity that is also the strength of Indian society and lends vibrancy to our national fabric. But pluralism should strengthen, not weaken our national resolve. It is an unfortunate fact that Muslims form a substantial part of the underprivileged. The principal reason for this is the fact that the Congress, a dominant presence in power for six decades, has secured minority support through the politics of fear rather than a healthy diet of development.

The BJP will implement a set of policies committed to a massive expansion of modern education among Muslims, particularly for the girl child, through a new nationwide network of schools, in a public-private partnership programme. This will include, but not be limited to:

1. Capital assistance in new educational projects, both for basic and technical education, in low-income minority areas. Each project will be vetted for viability by a team of professionals within a maximum of six months.

2. Cash incentives for the education of the girl child, based on attendance and performance. Incentives will rise for those girls who get admission into recognised colleges for higher education.

3. Computer centres will be set up in low income urban areas and the most backward districts of the country.

4. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, today a stagnant source of toxic politics, will be revitalised into a hub for economic projects specifically targeted towards employment creation. There will be special emphasis on crafts and small-scale industries that have been traditional employers of minorities. The neglect of the Congress-led UPA Government was evident in the fact that even monies allotted for minority welfare programmes in States like Maharashtra were largely, if not wholly, unspent.

5. Youth are the owners of the future, and it is our duty to make them a dynamic social and economic engine for upliftment. The young do not live only in cities. In districts like Murshidabad in Bengal, young girls are being forced by poverty into making bidis on pathetic wages. Dynamic intervention is needed to improve income levels where such jobs exist and to create fresh avenues of employment where they do not. The unfortunate phase of confused loyalties in some minority sections is over. Generations have been born in free India who are as committed to the nation as the nation is committed to them. The success stories of Muslims in sports, cinema, industry and a host of other fields, as individuals and team players, makes every Indian proud.

6. Terrorism does not have a religion. Those who espouse terrorism have stepped outside the moral code of their religion into barbarism. We must lift community-relations from the morass of misunderstanding. A vibrant, modern India can have no place for either the perpetrators or the exploiters of fear.

Religious Conversions 

The BJP will facilitate, under the auspices of noted religious leaders, the setting up of a permanent inter-faith consultative mechanism to promote harmony among and trust between communities. This mechanism will also be used for a sustained and sincere Inter-Faith Dialogue between leaders of the Hindu and Christian communities on all aspects of life, including the issue of religious conversions. The dialogue should be held in the spirit of the unanimous report of the Inter-Faith Dialogue on Conversions, which was organised at the Vatican in May 2006 by the Pontifical Council for Inter-Faith Dialogue and the World Council of Churches, Geneva.

Health for all: India’s wealth, people’s health 

Access to quality and affordable healthcare remains a dream for a vast majority of our people. This is truly ironical because India is rapidly emerging as a global destination for medical care for foreigners. The BJP will launch a massive programme, through public-private participation, to introduce a ‘Health for All’ scheme based on an innovative insurance policy. Under this scheme, the premium of BPL families will be paid by Government. Beneficiaries will have access to Government and private hospitals for cashless treatment. We will make the ‘108’ telephone service – for medical emergencies – universally accessible throughout India in 12 months.

One of our main targets will be to eradicate the curse of malnutrition. We will do so by revamping existing programmes and launching a multi-pronged war against malnutrition across the nation, especially in the under-developed areas, with the help of State Governments. All resources will be provided to achieve this goal.

The BJP will also initiate action on the following:

1. Set up a National Regulatory Authority for private hospitals, nursing homes and special care facilities to ensure quality services, affordable fees and prevent/punish malpractice. While private sector participation in health care is welcome, it cannot become a source of unrestricted and unrestrained profit-making at the expense of the people.

2. Ongoing work on setting up six additional All-India Institutes of Medical Sciences in various parts of the country, which were proposed by the NDA Government but not acted upon by the UPA, will be expedited. Similar institutions will be set up in other places to broad-base access to specialised medical care.

3. Incentives and disincentives will be introduced for State Governments to improve the quality of primary health care, maternal health care, and child health care.

4. Targets will be set for achieving significant reduction in maternal and infant mortality by improving the Janani Suraksha Yojana. The successful initiative of the BJP Government in Gujarat in this regard will be used as a model.

5. Preventive health care by way of inoculation against diseases and dissemination of information will receive focussed attention.

6. A national programme will be launched to vaccinate adults and children against all forms of hepatitis.

7. Substantial investment will be made in promoting Ayurved as an alternative therapy. Full support will be extended to the promotion of Unani system of medicine and homoeopathy. The promotion of Yoga will receive all Government assistance.

8. Clean drinking water is one of the best barriers against common but often fatal diseases. The BJP proposes to make access to clean drinking water a fundamental right for all citizens.

Population Stabilisation 

The BJP views the people of India as productive assets of society. To maximise their productivity, they have to be provided with access to health, education, technology and skills, which, in turn, require additional resources. This will be possible if we are able to stabilise India’s population. Towards this end, the BJP will address three priority issues:

1. Recognition of close linkages between sustainable development and population stabilisation.

2. Link population programmes with other development initiatives like health, education, nutrition and poverty eradication programmes.

3. Follow a non-coercive and gender sensitive approach for population stabilisation.

One earth, green earth: Creating the right environment 

The BJP will pursue national growth objectives through an ecologically sustainable pathway that leads to mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. We recognise that containing global warming is essential to protecting life and security of people and environment. Mitigating the threat by building a low carbon economy is the biggest economic opportunity of the 21st century.

The BJP endorses the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities", as enshrined in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. We look at ‘Climate Change’ in the context of the promises made by the international community for technology transfer and additional financing since Rio, which have remained unfulfilled. The BJP will actively pursue the transfer of critical technologies that can have a significant impact on reducing carbon emissions.

Bearing in mind concerns on environment and related climate change issues, the BJP will:

1. Give appropriate importance to containing climate change.

2. Lay importance on energy security and sustainable energy pathways by setting clear targets for energy efficiency and renewable energy.

3. Bring about a complete shift in subsidy from chemical fertilisers to rewarding farmers for pursuing conservation and enhancement of local crop varieties, thereby enhancing the conservation of local agro-biodiversity.

4. Offer attractive support prices and incentives for traditional rain-fed crops and promote markets for them. This will be coupled with a decentralised Public Distribution System that will mop up excess production of local food and distribute it among those households that are food deficit locally. A decentralised PDS will be more climate smart since it will eliminate excessive costs of transportation and storage.

5. Revisit laws for protecting forests and reserve parks to make them more effective in preventing encroachment and man-animal conflict. All resources will be provided for protecting forestland and animal reserves; wilful destruction of forests and killing of wildlife for profit or pleasure will fetch stringent punishment.

6. A permanent Task Force will be set up for the protection and preservation of tigers, lions and other wild cats. A separate Task Force will look after the protection and preservation of elephants. A third Task Force will look after bird sanctuaries. They will be duly empowered to take whatever steps are necessary to achieve their goals.

7. Provide incentives to encourage institutions and individuals to switch over to energy saving devices and eco-friendly designs for housing and workplace. Full support will be given for developing low-energy, low-cost technology by both public and private sectors.

A Group of Experts will be set up to formulate target-driven objectives towards this end. 

8. Encourage citizens’ participation in protecting the environment and curbing pollution.

Schools will be involved in promoting environment and ecology-related issues among children.

9. Adopt a mission-mode approach to clean all rivers.

10. Launch a national programme for citizens’ participation in reforestation, agro-forestry and social forestry by planting a billion trees every year.

11. Importance given to programmes to arrest the melting of Himalayan glaciers from which most major rivers in North India originate.

Administrative issues & centre-state relations: We are committed to good governance 

The BJP will set up a Group of Ministers to study the report of the Administrative Reforms Commission and submit its recommendations within six months. Given the importance of these reforms to our pursuit of the goal of Good Governance, the BJP proposes to implement them through an appropriate body under the Prime Minister’s Office. We will strive to bring about absolute transparency in Government’s decision-making process. Corruption at any level of Government will be dealt with swiftly.

We will place Centre-State relations on an even keel through the process of consultation.

The genuine grievances of States will be addressed in a comprehensive manner. The moribund National Development Council will be revived and made into an active body.

While every effort will be made to meet the development aspirations of the people and make authority accountable to the citizens, no concessions will be made to separatist and insurgent groups.

Jammu & Kashmir 

Jammu & Kashmir was, is and shall remain an integral part of the Union of India. Its status is non-negotiable and, as successive elections have comprehensively demonstrated, the people of Jammu & Kashmir see themselves as part of the Indian national mainstream. The BJP will be guided by the following principles while dealing with issues related to Jammu & Kashmir:

1. The territorial integrity of India is inviolable. The unanimous Parliamentary Resolution of 1994 reiterates this point and shall remain the cornerstone of future decisions and actions of our Government.

2. To meet the aspirations of the people of Jammu & Kashmir and ensure rapid progress of this State, the BJP will promote an agenda of equal development of its three regions.

— Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. All support, including financial, will be provided to the State Government for this purpose.

3. The Pandits who had to leave their home and hearth in the Kashmir Valley on account of separatist violence and terrorism are fully deserving of all support and assistance, which will be provided to them in full measure. Their return to the land of their ancestors with full dignity, security and assured livelihood will figure high on the BJP’s agenda. 4. The long-pending problems and demands of refugees from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir will be addressed. 5. Article 370 poses a psychological barrier for the full integration of the people of Jammu & Kashmir with the national mainstream. The BJP remains committed to the abrogation of this Article. Small States 

The BJP has always been in favour of formation of smaller states. It was during the NDA’s rule that the three small states of Uttarakhand, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh were created. Keeping in mind its commitment to good governance and all-round development, the BJP in future, too, would encourage the cause of establishment of smaller States. In consonance with its policy, the BJP supports the creation of Telangana as a separate State of the Union of India.

We will sympathetically examine and appropriately consider the long pending demands of the Gorkhas, the Adivasis and other people of Darjeeling district and Dooars region.

North-East 

Poor governance, corruption and insurgency have resulted in the resources-rich north-eastern states lagging behind. The physical distance between the North-East and New Delhi has contributed to the widening of psychological distance. The NDA years saw the Union Government actively pushing a development agenda for the north-eastern States. A similar but more robust agenda will be crafted by the BJP in power for the welfare of every north-eastern State and the region’s rapid development. In doing so, the BJP will be guided by the following:

1. Immediate steps will be taken to stem the tide of illegal immigration from Bangladesh to Assam and other North-Eastern States. The construction of the India-Bangladesh border fence will be completed without any further delay. A special cell will be set up to monitor the detection, detention and deportation of illegal immigrants.

2. Insurgent groups will be dealt with firmly. Simultaneously, the grievances of a section of the youth will be identified and addressed.

3. The land and culture of indigenous ethnic groups will be protected.

4. Flood control in Assam and river water management will receive special attention.

5. Appropriate resources will be allocated for land development, agriculture and allied activities, housing, nutrition, health, education, rural connectivity and irrigation.

6. New institutions of higher education in engineering and medical sciences will be set up.

7. Job-generating schemes will be initiated, especially in the services sector, to address the problem of unemployment in the region. Tourism and traditional skills-based industries will be given a big boost.

8. Special emphasis will be given to connectivity with and within North-Eastern States.

Hill States & Desert States 

The BJP recognises the special needs and unique problems of the hill and desert States.

In consultation with the Governments of these States, a development-based, State specific model will be evolved so that the aspirations of the people can be met.

Union Territories 

Given their unique status, Union Territories will receive special attention. We will focus on developing and strengthening the economy of Union Territories. Tourism will be promoted; tribal welfare and rights will receive full attention; and, infrastructure and coastal area development will be given top priority.

Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshdweep Islands 

The BJP is committed to the protection and integrated development of our island territories.

Judicial Reforms 

The BJP will initiate a set of judicial reforms to deal with the issue of appointment of judges, tackling the backlog of cases and other problems that exist at various levels of the judiciary.

Towards this end, the BJP will:

1. Streamline the appointment procedure of judges in the higher judiciary through the National Judicial Commission and introduce guidelines on objective criteria to determine merit.

2. Double the number of courts and the judicial strength of the sub-ordinate judiciary in five years.

3. Create a Fund for Modernisation of Courts to improve the physical and operational infrastructure of courts.

4. Set up a separate class of courts for cases involving specified commercial laws such as the Contract Act, Negotiable Instruments Act, and other business laws. These would deliver quicker justice and be partly funded by charging both litigants a ‘Fast Track’ fee.

5. Reform the criminal justice system to make dispensation of justice simpler, quicker and more effective on the basis of the Malimath Committee Report.

6. Computerise and network courts all over the country for improving their efficiency.

7. Extend fast track courts to all layers of the judiciary.

8. Expand alternative disputes redressal mechanisms through Lok Adalats and Tribunals.

9. Appoint a Judicial Procedural Reforms Committee which will suggest, in six months, how to halve the time taken to conduct every trial, civil or criminal. The aim would be to ensure that three-fourths of all cases are completed within 12 months.

10. Halve the number of cases in which the Government is a litigant in the next three years.

Electoral Reforms 

The BJP will seek, through consultation with other parties, to evolve a method of holding Assembly and Lok Sabha elections simultaneously. Apart from reducing election expenses for both political parties and Government, this will ensure certain stability for State Governments.

Panchayati Raj Institutions 

To empower self-governance at the grassroots level, the BJP will strengthen Panchayati Raj institutions. Towards this end, it will:

1. Work for the effective financial and administrative empowerment of Panchayati Raj institutions and Urban Local Bodies in respect of funds, functions and functionaries. There will be further devolution of powers by amending the Constitution.

2. The institution of the Gram Sabha will be strengthened to enable a full discussion on development projects, scrutinise the allocation and spending of funds, and evaluating the performance of elected and Government functionaries.

Preserving our cultural heritage 

Ram Setu 

Ram Setu is our national heritage. Millions want to visit it and it can be developed as a centre of cultural tourism. For millions it is a place of pilgrimage. Saving Rama Setu is to save the vast thorium deposits which are the future source of our energy. Thorium technology will ensure India’s energy security. BJP will, therefore, look for an alternative alignment for the proposed Sethu-Samudram Channel Project (SSCP).

Ram Temple 

There is an overwhelming desire of the people in India and abroad to have a grand temple at the birth place of Sri Ram in Ayodhya. The BJP will explore all possibilities, including negotiations and judicial proceedings, to facilitate the construction of the Ram Temple in Ayodhya.

Ganga 

Ganga occupies a special place in the Indian psyche. It is most unfortunate that it has been thoroughly neglected even after India attained freedom. It is a pity that even after six decades of independence Ganga continues to be thoroughly polluted and is drying. The BJP will ensure the cleanliness, purity and uninterrupted flow of Ganga, and will take all measures, legal and administrative, in this regard. Necessary financial and technical assistance will be provided on priority.

In addition, a massive ‘Clean Rivers Programme’ will be launched across the country with the participation of voluntary organisations.

Cow and its Progeny 

In view of the recent judgement by the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court, and in keeping with the Directive Principles of State Policy as contained in the Constitution, necessary legal framework will be created to protect and promote cow and its progeny.

In view of the contribution of cow and its progeny to agriculture, socio-economic and cultural life of our country, the Department of Animal Husbandry will be suitably strengthened and empowered for the protection and promotion of cow and its progeny. A National Cattle Development Board will be set up to implement a programme for the improvement of indigenous livestock breeds.

Monasteries and Temples 

The BJP shall ensure autonomous administration of Maths and Mandirs. These institutions have been the heart and hub of dharmic and cultural life and traditions of Indian society. Huge properties were offered to Maths and Mandirs by society for running their religio-cultural activities and service projects for the benefit of all. The management of such institutions should be freed from Government control and handed over to autonomous bodies constituted by the followers and devotees of those seats. Necessary legal framework will be provided for this purpose.

All dharmic activities will be considered as ‘charity’ with appropriate tax incentives. A special cell will be created to make dharmic organisations’ interface with government agencies hassle-free.

A National Mission for beautifying and improving the infrastructure and amenities at pilgrimage centres of all faiths will be launched.

Waqf Properties 

The BJP will examine the recommendations of the Joint Parliamentary Committee regarding Waqf properties headed by Shri K Rahman Khan, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha, and would, in consultation with Muslim religious leaders, take steps to remove encroachments from and unauthorised occupation of waqf properties.

Heritage Sites 

The ASI will be provided with appropriate resources for the maintenance of all national heritage sites and prevent their vandalisation in any form.

Languages 

Indian languages are repositories of our rich literature, history, culture, art and scientific achievements. Many of our dialects are important source for knowing our heritage.

Sanskrit and Tamil have made remarkable contributions in this regard. BJP would promote Indian languages and measures for the development of all Indian languages including Urdu will be taken by providing adequate resources so that they become a powerful vehicle for creating a knowledge society.

The CPI (M)’s manifesto reaffirms its anti-BJP stand, in which it holds the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) responsible for the coming general elections. “After the last general elections, the BJP-led alliance was nowhere near commanding a majority in the Lok Sabha. Inspite of this, the BJP opportunistically formed a government under its leadership”, it states.

Hitting out at the RSS, it says that the BJP “believes in Hindutva, and is committed to dismantling the secular-democratic values of the Indian Republic. It also lashes out at the BJP by describing its 13-month rule a disaster. 

It accuses the BJP of ”increasing authoritarianism”, for it used the “draconian Article 356-not once, but twice-to dismiss the elected Bihar state government. It is only the firm stand taken by the President and the BJP’s failure to muster a majority in the Rajya Sabha, which foiled this brazen attack on democracy”.

It goes on further to attack BJP’s stand on most of the issues ranging from Prasar Bharati to its economic policy and from Pokhran to Kargil.

It also stresses that Congress is not the alternative and that it is a party bereft of the political and ideological will to rally all the secular and democratic forces to fight the menace of communalism.

The manifesto reinstates its stand on not compromising with communalism in any form. The Left parties stand for uniting all sections of the people in order to advance the struggle to bring in alternative policies opposed to liberalisation and communalism.

The CPI (M) advocates:
Legislation for separation of religion and politics in light of the Supreme Court judgement in the Bommai Case;
Effective prohibition on the use of religions issues for electoral purposes;
Implementation of the Protection of Places of Worship Act to see that no disputes on religious places arise;
The Ayodhya dispute to be referred to Supreme Court under Article 138(2) for a speedy judicial verdict;
Special steps to prosecute all those found guilty by the Sri Krishna Commission for the Mumbai riots of 1993.
Federalism for National Unity
CPI (Communist Party of India)

The elections to the 15th Lok Sabha are being held at a time when the country faces serious threat to its economic and political independence due to right-ward shift in economic policies under the garb of economic neo-liberalism and pro-imperialist tilt in the foreign policy.

This is under the dubious slogan of building strategic partnership with the USA. BJP has reverted to its core agenda of communalism while continuing unashamed defence of economic neo-liberalism and pro-US tilt in the name of fighting growing menace of terrorism. 

To halt the ruling classes from pursuing this disastrous course, the CPI and Left is joining the electoral battle with the slogan of providing a non-Congress and non-BJP alternative that should carry forward the glorious tradition of anti-imperialism, secular polity and independent economic development ensuring economic and social justice to all.. We seek your support and vote for this sacred task.

The CPI was born and grew in the course of the Freedom struggle against British rule. Thousands of revolutionary fighters who spent several years in jails and concentration camps, and never hesitated to sacrifice their lives joined its ranks. Communists have been the initiators of the organized workers, kisans, khet mazdoors, women and students and youth movements from the pre-independence to the present day linking them up with the struggle against imperialism, feudal princes and monopolists. They were the organizers and heroes of the glorious Telengana, Tebhaga, Vayalar –Punnapara, Pepsu and other struggles.

Communists were in the fore front in the struggles against princely states and for integrated India. Continuing the heritage of the freedom struggle, Communists courageously initiated struggles for defence of secular polity, national integrity, for the rights of workers, for self independent economic development, dominance of public sector in the national economy, for land reforms, fair wages to agri-workers, gender justice, education to all, social security and health care for each and every citizen. They consistently stood up for the rights of the minorities, tribal, dalits and other deprived sections. They upheld the banner of parliamentary democracy that is constantly coming under threat in recent days.

In the wake of the communal fascist offensive launched by the Sangh Parivar, misusing the BJP led NDA regime, steps were taken to communalise the education, administration and culture. The CPI at its Thiruananthapuram Party Congress gave a clarion call of BJP HATAO-DESH BACHAO (Remove BJP, save the country) and conducted a nation-wide campaign.

That was later supported and adopted by other Left and Secular parties. To achieve the goal of BJP Hatao-Desh Bachao campaign, the CPI joined forces with other Left and secular parties during the elections to the 14th Lok Sabha. The people magnificently responded to the call and not only ousted BJP led NDA from power but also elected the largest number of Left MPs to the Lok Sabha.

A secular formation -UPAtook over power at the Centre with the outside support from Left. The basis of this outside support was the Common Minimum Programme (CMP) which later the government adopted as its National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP).

Initial achievements of the UPA govt, in response to the demand and pressure of the Left, the UPA government took certain measures to meet the promises made in the CMP. It banned the recruitment of mercenaries for US aggression in Iraq, for some time restored the policy of solidarity with the struggling Palestinian people and took certain initiatives to normalize relations with our neighbours. Within the country, certain positive steps were taken to ameliorate the miseries of the masses.

For the first time in the history of Independent India a law to provide hundred days employment to the rural poor (NREGA) was enacted.

Though it had several lacunas and shortcomings it was an important step. Similarly laws for right to information (RTI), tribal and other forest dwellers rights, law against domestic violence were enacted. Some measures were also taken to de-communalise the education.

But simultaneously it took steps to meet its class interests. Unscrupulous disinvestment of PSUs, unbridled entry of FDIs, particularly in the secondary market continued.

During the four and half years when the Left extended out side support to the UPA government, it had to submit more than a dozen notes to the UPA government-Left Coordination Committee to oppose the government moves that were in violation of the CMP.

The Left was able to restrain the UPA government on such major issues like disinvestment of profit making PSUs, unbridled FDIs in finance sector, entry of MNCs in retail sector so on and so forth. On the issue of disinvestment, the Left had even to resort to the boycott of the Coordination Committee.

The Congress leadership wanted to dilute government equity in banks, preparatory to their eventual privatisation. We prevented that.

The Congress leadership wanted to privatise the insurance sector. We opposed that.

The Congress leadership wanted to hand over the enormous accumulated funds in the Provident Fund and Pension Fund to the private sector for so-called ‘efficient management’. We did not allow that.

We thus saved the financial sector from the disastrous crisis that has overtaken it in the USA, UK and other capitalist countries.

Even the propagandists of economic neo-liberalism have to concede that if impact of global economic meltdown is not that harsh for India, the credit should go to the Left that opposed certain measures of the government, particularly the so-called reforms in the finance sector

But gradually it became obvious that, under the compulsions of its class interests, the UPA government, particularly its leader, the Congress, was resorting to the tactics of hoodwinking the people. It was taking all the measures under the pressure of World Bank-IMF that were possible through administrative measures.

It showed restrain only on the issues that required parliamentary sanction which meant support by Left in the Parliament. Right ward shift in the economic policies, its anti-people character was the real bone of contention between the Left and UPA government that the Left was supporting from out side. 
DMK (Dravida Munnettra Kazhagam)

Protecting the small scale industries and public sector units from the economic recession in the US, giving more autonomy for States, raising the income tax exemption limit from Rs 1.5 lakh to Rs 2.5 lakh per annum, 60% devolution of tax revenue to States, establishing an Indian Institute of science ( IISc) in Chennai and the second unit of Integral coach factory are some of the issues the ruling DMK would take up with the new Government at the Centre post Lok Sabha Elections.

In its manifesto for Lok Sabha Elections for 2009, the party said education should be restored to State list. In 1976, it was shifted from the State list to the Concurrent list. As a result, the development of education is retarded due to the existence of dual authorities.

In the next five years, expenditure on education and health should be increased to 7% and 3% respectively. As the States play a direct role in providing education and healthcare to the poor, the Centre should transfer more resources to them.

Releasing the manifesto on Thursday, DMK President and Chief Minister, M Karunanidhi said his front is set to win all the 40 seats as in the previous 2004 elections. He said it would seek votes on the plank of five slogans: Secular and good governance; uphold religious harmony; defend social justice; nurture equality and promote democracy.

Recalling the historical achievements of UPA inclusive of DMK in the last five years, the manifesto said, " the 13 Union Ministers from Tamil Nadu have implemented a number of schemes for the development of TN and India. TN obtained 11% of the total plan expenditure of the Union Government amounting to nearly Rs 3.70 lakh crore over the last five years. This unprecedented financial transfer facilitated implementation of 69 union plan schemes in the State".

Stating since 1990, several progressive changes have taken place in Indian federalism, it said a conducive political development has emerged facilitating coalition governance with the support of regional parties. In fact, the Indian economy witnessed the higher growth rate of 7 to 9 only during these periods. " The time has now ripened for the constitutional federalism to blossom out of the existing political federalism".

The party is in favour of making appropriate changes in the Constitution for autonomy at the State level and federal Governance at the union level to strengthen federalism in India. It has placed its views before the commission on centre-state relations constituted by the Centre in 2008.

The party will insist on the speedy implementation of Sethusamudram canal project, establishing a southern gas grid in the State for transportation and distribution liquid gas, setting up the R & D wing of ONGC and implementing a 250 mw solar energy plant as a pioneering scheme in TN.

It has also promised the voters to take up with the centre for introducing more super fast trains, new broad gauge lines and extending the mass rapid transit system upto Mamallapuram.

Even as it is proud of the 8% growth rate achieved in the last five years, the manifesto said the the global financial crisis has adversely affected the industrial sector, pulling down the the country’s growth rate. In spite of these challenges, TN attracts new investments in industrial and IT sectors.

Among other things, the party wants the centre to extend full financial support to the TN Government’s initiative in inter-linking rivers in the State. It will insist on the Centre to declare minimum support price for paddy on par with MSP for wheat and increase the price for paddy.

In the case of sugar cane, the cultivators in the State are getting Rs 1220 per tonne as state advised price against the MSP of Rs 811.80 per tonne announced by the centre. As the cane growers are demanding a SAP of Rs 1500 per tonne, DMK will constitute a tripartite committee of officials, growers and industry representatives to study the demand and make recommendations.
INDIAN NATIONAL CONGRESS

THE KEY ISSUE

The 2004 Lok Sabha election is no ordinary election. It is not just an election between one party and another. It is a clash of sharply competing values, of diametrically opposite ideologies. It is a contest between the Congress that has always celebrated India’s glorious past and drawn from its traditions to build modern India, and the BJP that is systematically undermining the very essence of Indian civilization and destroying the very idea of India. The Congress recognises that this is not a moment for a narrow pursuit of partisan power. This is the moment to consolidate all forces subscribing to the fundamental values of our Constitution. The Congress’s goal is to defeat the forces of obscurantism and bigotry who contributed nothing to the Freedom Movement or the making of our Constitution and whose sole objective is to subvert our millennial heritage and composite nationhood. In this sacred endeavour, the Congress has joined hands with like-minded political parties in different states. The Congress and its various allies are united in their determination to defeat the BJP, which threatens to rewrite our past and wreck our future. In the process, we will present the national alternative to bring India back on the path of economic growth with social harmony. 

OVERVIEW OF 45 YEARS OF CONGRESS ACHIEVEMENTS

The achievements of successive Congress governments are indelibly marked on the contemporary face of our country. The RSS-BJP combine has never missed an opportunity to ridicule, distort and misinterpret everything that the Congress party has done.

It is the Congress that fought for and won India’s freedom. It was the forebears of the BJP in the Hindu Mahasabha and the RSS rejected Mahatma Gandhi’s call, “Karenge ya Marenge” with which he launched the Quit India Movement. It is Congress leaders like Gandhiji, Indiraji and Rajivji who have sacrificed their lives in the service of the country.

It is the Congress that was responsible for establishing and nurturing parliamentary democracy. It was the Congress that made our Constitution possible, a national charter for radical but peaceful socio-economic transformation. It is the Congress that spearheaded social reforms to give dignity to those who were discriminated for centuries. It is the Congress that has preserved and protected the political unity and sovereignty of India. It is Jawaharlal Nehru who, more than anyone else, laid the foundation of the Modern Indian Nation-State.

It is the Congress that created the public sector to industrialise India and make it self-reliant, to take it to new heights of technological progress, to develop backward regions and provide employment to crores of Indians, particularly dalits and adivasis. 

It is the Congress that abolished zamindari and ushered in land reforms. It is the Congress that achieved the Green Revolution and the White Revolution bringing new prosperity to our kisans and khet mazdoors and making India the largest milk producer in the world.

It is the Congress that promoted the scientific spirit and established the infrastructure and institutions that have made India a major nuclear, space and missile power, and a global leader in Information Technology (IT). India could test its nuclear weapons in May 1998 only because of the foundations laid by the Congress. Missiles like Agni are the legacy of the Congress. Satellites like INSAT are the legacy of the Congress.

It is the Congress that launched extensive anti poverty and rural development programmes that have helped alleviate the distress of the most disadvantaged and deprived sections of our society and made a massive dent on rural poverty. A nation which had two-thirds of its people under the poverty line at Independence is now a nation with two-thirds of its population above the poverty line in the half century since Independence. The middle class of India is the proud creation of the Congress.

It is the Congress that empowered scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and other backward classes through reservations and through social welfare and economic development programmes for their welfare and well-being.

It is the Congress, responding to Mahatma Gandhi’s call for Poorna Swaraj through Gram Swaraj, that promoted grassroots development through grassroots democracy in our villages and mohallas. It is the Congress that conceived and pushed through the Constitutional amendments relating to Panchayati Raj and the Municipalities.

It is the Congress that introduced and enacted extensive labour legislation to give workers in the organised sector and contract labour fair and remunerative wages and job security. It is the Congress that began the process of extending social security to the 93 per cent work force that subsists in the unorganized sector. It is the Congress that pioneered the revolution in higher and technical education that has now rendered the Indian brain the most highly valued commodity in the world. It is the Congress that established the IITs, the IIMs and the RECs and that established the vast network of research laboratories. 

It is the Congress that launched liberalization and economic reforms. It is the Congress’s policies that made India the world’s fourth largest economy by 1998.

Above all, it is the Congress that has maintained India’s unity while celebrating her many diversities.

WHY CONGRESS AGAIN?

There are many reasons why the Congress remains unique among all political parties in India.
The Congress is the only all-India party in the country, the only national political force with a presence in each and every region of this vast country. Whether in power or out, the Congress is a visible and tangible political force in villages, towns and cities all across India.
The Congress is the only political party that derives its strength and support from, and appeals to, each and every section of our variegated society. It is the only political party that has provided for reservations in its organization for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, 0BCs minorities and women.
The Congress is the only party whose philosophy on governance is rooted in democratic values, combining sustainable economic growth with social justice, and marrying economic liberalization to social liberalism. The Congress way is the way of dialogue, not discord. The Congress way is the way of accommodation, not acrimony.
The Congress is the only party whose philosophy of governance is based on a strong centre working purposefully with strong states and with empowered local self-government institutions. Rajniti Se Lok Niti, Gram Sabha Se Lok Sabha remains its objective.
The Congress has always been a party of youth. It respects age and seniority but youthful energy and dynamism has always been its hallmark. In 1989, it was Rajiv Gandhi who reduced the voting age to 18. It was Rajiv Gandhi who declared Swami Vivekanandas birth anniversary on January 12th as National Youth Day. It was also he who expanded the network of Nehru Yuvak Kendras to cover all the districts of the country.
The Congress has always been more a broad national movement than a mere political party in the conventional sense of the term. For 118 years, it has provided an unusually broad platform for people from diverse social backgrounds to come together in the service of the country. The Congress embodies the idea of India like no other party does.

For the Congress, Indian nationalism is all-inclusive and cosmopolitan, a nationalism that draws creatively from every facet of India’s rich and variegated heritage, a nationalism that is not narrow or bigoted but celebrates the contribution made to our composite culture by each of the religions of the land. It is a nationalism that has an equal and dignified place for everything Indian and for each and every Indian. It is a nationalism that integrates India emotionally. The BJP’s “cultural nationalism is a device for dividing Indians emotionally. The Congress unites the Indian nation through consensus; the BJP divides the Indian nation through confrontation.

The Congress is deeply concerned that secularism has come under the most severe and sustained assault in the past few years. For the Congress, secularism means full freedom and respect for all religions. It means equal opportunities for followers of all religions and no discrimination on the grounds of religion. Most of all, it means firm opposition to communalism of all kinds.

The misuse of any religion to spread hate and discord in our society is communalism. The misuse of religion to incite popular passions to ignite mutual antagonisms is communalism. Most Indians are religious. At the same time, most Indians are respectful of other faiths. Most Indians want to live with all other Indians, whatever their religion, in harmony and goodwill. But a handful of Indians have become self-appointed guardians of their own faiths. It is they who seek to destroy social peace. It is they who want us to be prisoners of a distorted past, invented and misinterpreted by them to stoke envy and jealousy and hatred between communities.

This is the real battleground for secularism. It is more than a majority-minority issue. It is actually a struggle between those who wish to preserve the essence of all religions and those who seek to deliberately distort that essence to undermine our composite nationhood for unacceptable ideological reasons and partisan electoral ends.

THE BJP /NDA’s MONUMENTAL FAILURES

In the last five years at the centre, the BJP-led NDA government has
massively increased unemployment by economic policies that have
thrown lakhs of workers out of employment in agriculture, the handlooms sector, other non-farm rural employment and manufacturing and mining;
failed to ensure the devolution of functions, functionaries and finances to the panchayats and municipalities, thus limiting the potential for employment generation by elected local bodies;
caused stagnation of investment and growth in small-scale and cottage industry and agriculture, which are the main sources of employment in the country;
generated employment reduction schemes in government services and the public sector;
mounted an ideological assault on the public sector, particularly profitable public enterprises which have been the single-most important avenue of organized employment since Independence;
destabilized and lowered growth rates,
ending the steady rise in growth rates year after year, climaxing in nearly seven per cent annual growth, which characterised the 1992-97 growth performance,
lowered annual average growth over the last five years to much below six per cent, indeed as low as four per cent in two of the five years, accompanied by wild swings in the pendulum of growth;
caused acute distress for kisans and khet mazdoors, leading to an unprecedented number of kisan suicides across the country and growing destitution among khet mazdoors;
weakened national security by not spending huge amounts of money running into thousands of crores of rupees allocated for modernization of our armed forces;
damaged social harmony
by deliberately inciting and sponsoring a communal carnage in Gujarat;
by glorifying violence against missionaries;
by encouraging viciously communal and fascist organizations like the VHP / Bajrang Dal to spread hate;
subverted school curricula by rewriting history books to spread religious hatred and eroded the autonomy of prestigious intellectual institutions by taking away their professional independence;
destroyed probity in administration by encouraging corruption and fomenting scams in defense, telecom, DDA, allotment of petrol pumps, stock markets and UTI;
denigrated key institutions of parliamentary democracy like the CAG, NHRC, CEC, PAC and the CVC whenever their reports have indicted the government for its corruption and inefficiency and grossly misused the CBI;
undermined the independence of our foreign policy by not speaking up forcefully against the marginalisation of the United Nations, by not asserting India's position on world issues effectively and by constant flip-flops in our relations with Pakistan.
The Prime Minister has displayed a singular lack of consistency and clarity on major national issues, he has indulged in double-speak, whether it be
Ayodhya and on the preservation of secularism;
the carnage in Gujarat;
relations with Pakistan;
negotiations with different groups in Jammu and Kashmir;
and links with the RSS.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister took office notwithstanding his being arraigned before a court of law and the Liberhan Commission for his role in the demolition of the Babri Masjid. He has presided over shocking security lapses in the nation’s capital and elsewhere. Four years ago, he grandly announced that he would come out with a White Paper on ISI Activities in India. Till today, the nation is waiting for that expose. It is a matter of record that most of the serious terrorist attacks in the past three-four years have not been investigated by the Home Ministry and accountability fixed, while the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister keep on chanting their firm resolve to combat the menace of terrorism at all costs - a resolve that is completely hollow. 

The External Affairs Minister personally escorted three hard-core terrorists to safety to Kandahar in Afghanistan. These terrorists then continued their wanton killings of innocent men, women and children in J&K. Recently, the former head of Pakistan’s ISI has admitted that the terrorist escorted by Shri Jaswant Singh to Kandahar masterminded the attack on our Parliament on December 13, 2001.

The BJP is going to the polls on a so-called “feel good” factor. This is bogus. The reality is that under Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the average annual rate of economic growth is lower than in the 1980s and much lower than during 1992-96 when the Congress was in power. The rate of both public and private investment has declined over the period that the BJP-led NDA government has been in office. It is this lack of investment demand that has caused the build-up of foreign exchange reserves and that has resulted in the fall in interest rates both factors identified by the BJP as its “achievements”. Moreover, low interest rates have benefited borrowers but have enormously hurt the interests of crores of savers and bank depositors who have seen their valuable savings dwindle in value. The BJP claims that its highway development programme implemented by the National Highway Authority of India NHAI) is unprecedented. The truth is that the NHAI was established by the Congress government in 1995. Most of the plans had been finalized before the Congress demitted office. All that the BJP-led NDA government has done is turn the national highways already built by the Congress governments of the past, into express highways. Moreover, the new highways being built are not free; they can be used only after payment. Highways built under earlier Congress regimes during 1950-90 were all free and anybody could use them.

It was during the term of the BJP-led NDA government that the stock market and UTI scams took place, as detailed by the Joint Parliamentary Committee that has fixed the eighteen months commencing from the swearing in of the NDA government in October 1999 as the period of the scams. The scams wiped out the hard-earned savings of crores of middle class families, senor citizens, pensioners and widows. The epicenter of the scams lay in cooperative banks based in the constituencies of the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister.

The Tehelka video film showed the BJP President and other NDA leaders taking bribes. The Defence Minister who resigned in the wake of this expose saying he would not return till his name was cleared rejoined office while the enquiry was on.
The BJP and its cohorts orchestrated the horrific communal carnage in Gujarat after the tragic events at Godhra. The RSS is indicted in most commissions of inquiry into communal riots. The Supreme Court has pulled up the Gujarat government repeatedly for its complicity in the communal carnage of 2001. On this count alone, the people of India must reject the BJP. 

The BJP has fostered corruption to an unprecedented degree with scams after scams being revealed. On this count too, the people of India must reject the BJP.

The BJP’s economic policies have sharpened the divide between the rich and the poor, between the fortunate few and the disadvantaged many, between rural and urban India, between different regions of the country. On this count also, the people of India must reject the BJP. 

The BJP is using the NDA as a mask. Hiding behind the facade of the NDA, the BJP is misleading the people of our country. It has not given up its divisive agenda. This is one more count on which the people of India must reject the BJP.

THE CONGRESS PARTY'S PRIORITIES, PLANS AND PROGRAMMES

Change with Continuity

Congress policies have always been anchored in a vision of an economically prosperous, socially just, politically united and culturally harmonious India. These policies have never been reduced by rote to a mindless doctrine or empty dogma or simplistic mantra. The Congress has always created space for change. It has always been pragmatic. It has always been ready to respond to new challenges. In consequence, steadfastness to basic principles has never impeded responsiveness to new requirements. 

The 1950s needed land reforms, community development, the public sector and the building of agricultural, industrial, irrigation, educational, scientific and other infrastructure. The Congress ensured that this happened.

The 1960s and 1970s needed a direct attack on poverty, a whole new approach to agricultural growth and rural employment, the exploration and exploitation of domestic sources of oil, and the nationalization of banks to meet the requirements of not just big business houses but also give priority to farmers, weavers, cottage industries and small industries and traders, as also to fulfill social needs and aspirations. The Congress ensured that all this happened. 

The 1980s needed renewed emphasis on science and technology to solve the problems of the people, and the modernization of industry to ready India to meet the new challenges of the 21st century. It also required India to be ushered into the electronics, computers and telecommunications age in a significant way. The Congress ensured that this happened.

The l990s needed bolder economic retorms and liberalization and a much larger role for the private sector to accelerate growth and promote India’s integration into a rapidly-changing world economic system. A redefinition of the role of government in economic development, including Constitutionally-sanctioned Panchayati Raj Institutions and municipalities to function as units of local self-government was also needed. The Congress ensured that this happened.

The Congress makes a solemn commitment to the people of India: to restore peace among all of its peoples, to strengthen the secular order through emphasis on social harmony, cultural pluralism and respect for the rule of law, and to ensure a bright and secure economic future for every family in our country.

THE LAW OF THE LAND WILL BE ENFORCED WITHOUT FEAR OR FAVOUR TO ENSURE THAT SOCIAL HARMONY AND COHESION IS MAINTAINED THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY. THERE WILL BE NO COMPROMISE ON THIS.

Six Basics

The Congress’s six basics for governance:
Samajik Sadhhavna to ensure social cohesion and harmony by taking the strictest possible action against those who promote bigotry and hatred;
Yuva Rozgar to accelerate growth of productive and secure employment opportunities by around one crore a year so that each family has a viable livelihood.
Grameen Vikas to improve the income and welfare of kisans and khet mazdoors across the country;
Arthik Navotthan to unleash the creative energies of our professionals and entrepreneurs, the cutting edge of our middle class;
Mahila Sashaktikaran to provide for the political empowerment and full educational, economic and legal equality for women;
Saman Avsar to provide for equality of opportunity in every way for dalits, adivasis, OBCs and religious and linguistic minorities.
These six priorities constitute the foundation of all policies of the Congress. The Congress has consistently maintained that liberalisation and globalisation can be meaningful only if they are aimed at local-level economic and social transformation that directly benefits the poor in rural and urban India, bringing prosperity to the 6 lakh-odd villages of India and improving the living conditions of the urban poor. 

The Congress will broaden and deepen economic reforms. The over-riding Objective will be to attain and sustain year after year a 8-10% rate of economic growth and to spread this growth over all sectors, particularly agriculture and industry. An annual growth rate of less than 4-4.5% in agriculture and 10% in industry is simply unacceptable.

Rozgar

The priority requirement for accelerated employment generation is to revive economic growth and sustain it across the country at between 8-10% per year for well over a decade. This will be the Congress’s overall objective. Faster and broad-based economic growth is an essential pre-requisite for accelerating employment generation. The Congress will also adopt policies to expand employment in the organized sector, which has fallen precipitously in the last five years. Fiscal incentives to promote employment-intensive growth will be introduced. Continued growth in agriculture will create new employment opportunities. This is particularly so in the central, eastern and northeastern regions of the country which have still to realize their full agricultural potential. New jobs will also be created in other areas of rural development like horticulture, aquaculture, afforestation, dairying and agro-processing. These need and will be provided new investment, credit, marketing and technology inputs. A stable long-term export policy for agricultural products and commodities will be announced. The Congress will revamp the functioning of the Khadi and Village Industries Commission (KVIC) so as to make it a modern, research-based, technology-driven, customer-focused organization. New programmes for the modernization of the coir industry, handlooms, powerlooms, handicrafts, food processing, sericulture, wool development, leather, pottery, etc., will be launched. A national Employment Guarantee Act will be enacted immediately. This will provide a legal guarantee for at least 100 days of employment on asset-creating public works programmes every year at minimum wage, for every rural household. A greater thrust on labour-intensive exports of textiles, handicrafts, gems and jewelry, leather, software, engineering and consumer goods will also significantly boost employment. The textile industry will receive special focus in view of the increased competition in world markets from January 2005 as mandated by the WTO. The concerns of small-scale industry like shortage of working capital, lack of technology and marketing, delayed payments, harassment by inspectors will be addressed expeditiously. A cluster approach to the development of small-scale industry will he adopted. Along with vastly expanded credit facilities for self-employment, the services industry will be given all support to fulfill its true employment potential. This includes not just software and IT-enabled services, not just trade, distribution and transport, not just financial and telecommunications services but also tourism. Special infrastructural facilities for substantially expanding international and domestic tourism will be created. Reforms of laws and regulations that stand in the way of growth of the services industry will be undertaken. The Congress will also establish a National Commission to monitor the functioning of enterprises in the informal sector, the problems they face in access to technology, credit and markets and recommend corrective measures on an on-going basis. To enhance the employability of our youth, systematic efforts will be made to vocationalise secondary education and to establish at least one industrial training institute in each development block of the country through creative public-private partnerships. The employment exchange machinery will be revamped to provide a closer linkage between demand and supply for labour. As an indicator of how seriously the Congress takes its commitment to employment growth, an annual Rozgar Report to the Nation will he prepared and released on May 1. 

Kisans and Khet Mazdoors

The Congress will pursue an Agriculture First strategy in resource allocation. Public investment in agriculture will be stepped up substantially with focus in the backward and poor regions. This will cover irrigation, electrification, godowns, marketing, research and extension. The entire rural credit system based on cooperatives will be restored to health. The flow of agricultural credit would be doubled in the next three years and the coverage of small and marginal farmers by institutional lending will also expand substantially. Immediate steps will be taken to ease the burden of debt and high interest rates on farm loans. A time-bound programme for restoring all public tubewells to good working condition wherever required will be started. The pace of construction of new irrigation wells in the poorer districts of the country will be accelerated. A special technology and extension programme for dryland farming will be introduced. An intensive agricultural development programme for the 100-odd districts in the arid and semi-arid regions of the country will he put in place. Watershed development projects will be promoted on a large-scale and the wasteland development programme lying dormant these past few years will be revived. The agro-processing industry and other agriculture-related activities like dairying, aquaculture, fisheries, horticulture, sericulture will be encouraged through fresh investment, technology and marketing resources. A renewed emphasis will be placed on wasteland development and afforestation. While the terms of trade will always be maintained in favour of agriculture, simultaneously steps will be taken to ensure that profitability in agriculture is also increased. Farmers all over the country will receive fair and remunerative prices and government agencies entrusted with the responsibility for procurement and marketing will pay special attention to farmers in poor and backward states and districts. While farm insurance schemes for both crops and cattle will be implemented, the Congress will also examine the feasibility of an Agricultural Stabilisation Fund involving a system of direct support or income support to farmers particularly in the ecologically vulnerable regions of the country. Controls on the free movement of farm commodities and processing of agricultural products and regulations that depress the incomes of farmers will be systematically removed. Farmers will be given greater say in the organizations that supply inputs to them. The Congress will ensure the fullest implementation of minimum wage laws for farm labour. Comprehensive protective legislation will be enacted for all agricultural workers. It will redouble its efforts to distribute surplus productive land to the landless. It will also modernize the revenue administration at the local level and start a major national programme to record all titles to land and keep them up-to-date. Like it did for panchayats, the Congress will bring forward a Constitutional amendment to ensure the democratic, autonomous and professional functioning of all cooperatives. 

Women and Children

The Congress pledges to press for the Constitutional Amendment to reserve one-third of seats in the Lok Sabha and in Vidhan Sabhas for women. It will launch a movement for the effective implementation of social legislation such as for minimum age at marriage, anti-dowry, curbing atrocities on women, anti-sati, widow welfare, etc. as well as for minimum wages for enhancing women’s welfare. Stern measures will be taken to ensure the elimination of female foeticide and infanticide. Marriage registration will be made mandatory. 30% of all funds flowing into panchayats and nagarpalikas will be earmarked for programmes relating to the development of women and children and focus on the special needs of female agricultural labour and women cultivators. Village women and their associations will be empowered to assume responsibility for all development schemes relating to drinking water supply, sanitation, primary education and health, nutrition, biogas, maintenance of water pumps and borewells and farm forestry. Complete legal equality for women in all spheres will be made a practical reality, especially by removing discriminatory legislation, by giving them equal share in matrimonial property, by protecting their rights to matrimonial homes and ‘streedhan’, by giving them equal rights of ownership of assets like houses-and land, etc. All states will be encouraged to set up family courts at the earliest. There will be a major expansion in schemes for micro-finance based on self-help groups, especially for tribal women, women belonging to scheduled castes, women below the poverty line, rural women and women in distress, and particularly in the backward and ecologically sensitive regions and actively encourage the functioning of producer and marketing cooperatives. Some states of India, particularly in the South, have already reached replacement levels of fertility while other states will do so over this decade. But on present reckoning, four-five states of India will be unable to reach this crucial milestone for decades. The Congress will take the lead in replicating the success of other states in those states where population growth continues unabated. Population planning is not just a government programme but must become a movement of civil society as well. A sharply targeted mobilization effort will be mounted in the 150-odd districts that still have unacceptably high levels of fertility. 

Education and Health

The Congress pledges to raise public spending in education to at least 6% of GDP with at least half of this amount being spent in primary and secondary schools. A cess will he proposed on all central taxes to finance the commitment to universalize access to quality basic education. A National Commission on Education will be set up to allocate resources and monitor programmes for compliance with national priorities. The Congress will ensure that all institutions of higher learning in science, technology, social sciences and management will retain the sense of autonomy that they have enjoyed in previous Congress regimes. Academic excellence and professional competence would be the sole criteria for all appointments to bodies like the ICHR, ICSSR, UGC, NCERT etc. The Congress will ensure that nobody is denied education, including in institutions of excellence, because he or she is poor. Apart from increasing the supply of loan scholarships and refinance through banks, it will also establish a Education Development Finance Company along the lines of HDFC to provide loans at affordable rates to all those who cannot afford the costs of college and university education in science, engineering and medicine. Education at all stages would be free in all respects for boys and girls belonging to dalit and adivasi communities. A national cooked nutritious mid-day meal scheme will be introduced in primary and secondary schools across the country. The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) will be universalized to provide for a functional anganwadi in every settlement and full coverage, especially children below age of six. The Congress will raise public spending on health to at least 2-3% of GDP, with the focus on primary health care over the next five years and to around 5% of GDP over the next decade. The welfare of the Disabled in all respects will receive urgent attention. Some state governments administered by the Congress have introduced innovative health insurance programmes. A national scheme of health insurance for families living below the poverty line will be proposed. The Congress will introduce a new community anchored health worker scheme and implement it with the involvement of people’s organizations and panchayati raj institutions. 

Minorities

The Congress believes in affirmative action for all religious and linguistic minorities. The Congress has provided for reservations for Muslims in Kerala and Karnataka in government employment and education on the grounds that they are a socially and educationally backward class. The Congress is committed to adopting this policy for socially and educationally backward sections among Muslims and other religious minorities on a national scale. The Congress also pledges to extend reservations for the economically deprived persons belonging to communities that are at present not entitled to such reservations. The Congress will adopt all possible measures to promote and maintain communal peace and harmony, especially in sensitive areas. It will enact a comprehensive law on social violence in all its forms and manifestations, providing for investigations by a central agency, prosecution by Special Courts and payment of uniform compensation for loss of life, honour and property. The Congress commits itself to amending the Constitution to establish a Commission for Minority Educational Institutions that will provide direct affiliation for minority professional institutions to central universities. Special steps will be taken to spread modern and technical education among women in minority communities particularly. New middle-level technical institutions will be started in places where for example, weavers and artisans are concentrated. The National Minorities Development Corporation and State Minorities Development Corporations will be made direct-lending institutions. On the Ayodhya issue, the Congress’s stand has been very clear. All parties must wait for and abide by the verdict of the courts. If negotiations are to he held, they must be between the parties to the dispute and must have legal sanction. And the Places of Worship (Special Provision) Act, 1992 which freezes the status of all disputed sires other than Ayodhya as of August 15, 1947 must be strictly enforced. 

Dalits and Adivasis

The Congress will create a national consensus on the issue of dalits and adivasis getting a reasonable share of jobs in the private sector. A dialogue with private industry will be initiated to identify how best Indian industry could fulfill in tangible measure the aspirations of youth, especially those belonging to the weaker sections of society. Determined efforts will be made to promote a culture of entrepreneurship among the dalits and adivasis by providing businesses run by them with preferential treatment in government procurement and by extending bank credit at affordable terms. State governments will be urged to make legislation for conferring ownership rights in respect of minor forest produce on adivasis particularly who work in forests. All reservation quotas, including those relating to promotions will be fulfilled in a time-bound manner. Special recruitment drives particularly for Class land II vacancies will be launched. A comprehensive national programme for minor irrigation of all lands owned by dalits and adivasis will be introduced. Landless families will be endowed with some land through the proper implementation of land ceiling and land redistribution legislation. There is need to reconcile the objectives of faster economic growth and environmental conservation as far as tribal communities dependent on forests are concerned. The Forest Conservation Act, 1980 has prevented a wholesale loss of forests. At the same time, concerns have been raised that in its implementation rigidities have developed depriving tribal communities the benefits of economic growth. These concerns have to be recognized and addressed in an ecologically sustainable manner. In addition, there is need to put in place more effective systems of relief and rehabilitation for tribal communities displaced by development projects. Taking note of the growing unrest in tribal areas in various states, the Congress will have a fresh look at development strategies for tribal areas and work out new designs of sustainable livelihoods. Income accruing to the government from forest will be earmarked as additional assistance for programmes of tribal development. 

Food and Nutrition Security

Over the past few years, there has been far too much tampering with the public distribution system (PDS) that provides the basis for extending food security to crores of Indians. Because people are buying less foodgrain from ration shops, huge foodgrain stocks have been built up. The Congress will strengthen the PDS particularly in the poorest and backward blocks of the country and also involve women’s and ex-servicemen’s cooperatives in its management at the local level. While the focus of the PDS will be on below-the poverty line (BPL) families, surveys to identify such families will be conducted every two years by panchayats based on transparent and verifiable criteria such as land ownership, occupation, family status, etc. About 6-8% of our population comprising the most destitute and infirm do not have access to the PDS even where the PDS works well. Special schemes to reach foodgrains to this section through panchayats will he launched. Antyodaya cards for all households at risk of hunger will be introduced. Grain banks in chronically food- scarce areas will he established. It is a matter of great shame that even today over a third of babies born in India are under-weight reflecting acute malnourishment of the girl child who later becomes a mother. Nutrition programmes for the girl child particularly will be expanded on a significant scale. 

Panchayati Raj 

Panchayat bodies that got Constitutional sanction a decade ago because of the vision and relentless zeal of Rajiv Gandhi, now need full devolution of funds, functions and functionaries. Globalisation and economic reforms must be based on strong, effective and empowered institutions of local self-government. The Congress will ensure that all funds for poverty alleviation and rural development programmes will be credited directly to panchayat bodies. The Gram Sabha will be empowered to emerge as the foundation of the panchayati raj system. Appropriate audit systems would be established to ensure sound financial administration at the local level. 

Informal and Unorganised Sector

Almost 93% of the workforce in our country is in the unorganized sector. While every initiative must and will be taken to expand the proportion of employment in the organized sector, the Congress will ensure the well-being and welfare of all workers in the unorganized sector. Some Congress state governments have already taken significant steps in this area but a renewed national effort is now needed with focus on social insurance and health support. Special social security schemes started by earlier Congress governments for workers in the unorganized sector like weavers, handloom workers, fishermen and fisherwomen, toddy tappers, leather workers, plantation labour, beedi workers, etc., will be expanded. The Congress will establish a National Commission to examine problems facing enterprises operating in the unorganized sector. The Commission will be asked to make appropriate recommendations to provide technical, marketing and credit support to these enterprises. A National Fund will be created for this purpose. A single, simplified law will be enacted to set out the obligations of these enterprises to labour and for safety. Appropriate social security measures will he devised to protect the workers in the unorganized sector against the risks of ill-health, unemployment and old age. The Congress will create legal space in the cities and towns for hawkers, vendors, food-sellers and all such informal sector service activities that enrich urban life, so that they are spared the risk of extortion, eviction, confiscation and harassment. 

Social and Physical Infrastructure

Public-private partnerships will form the basis of infrastructure expansion. Among other things, this could take the form of public expenditure and private management. Subsidies in the provision of infrastructure will be made explicit and provided through the budget of the central and state governments. The railways have suffered immensely over the past few years with rail safety being a prime casualty. The Congress will move purposefully to modernize the vast railway network, keeping both the economic and social dimensions of the railways in mind. The Congress will vastly accelerate the development and use of the country’s irrigation potential. By 2020, the presently known irrigation potential must be harnessed, for which long-term commitments of funds will be made. But even after this, two-fifths of cultivated area will still be rain-fed, particularly in central India with the bulk of India’s tribal population. The Congress and its partners will prepare and implement, on a much larger scale, plans for these regions. The Congress will launch a special programme so as to ensure each household will have full access to reliable power in the next three to five years. The Congress will use India’s foreign exchange reserves creatively to significantly expand the existing public investment programme in power generation so as to add at least 6000-8000 MW of generating capacity every year. The public sector has a crucial role to play in power generation even as the private sector takes on an increased role in power distribution. In order to supplement water availability and recharge the country’s groundwater resources, a local community-based National Rainwater Harvesting Programme will be launched to capture at least an additional 1% of India’s rain resources every year. The Congress commits itself to work out a comprehensive programme of urban renewal based on public-private partnerships. This will lay particular emphasis on the modernization of urban transport, water supply and sanitation and control of pollution. Municipal administration will be revived and made financially self-sustaining. Social housing schemes will be launched to meet the needs of the urban poor and to deal with the proliferation of slums. Technologies to promote low-cost housing will he deployed on a large scale. 

Defence, National Security and Foreign Policy

The Congress will ensure that all delays in the modernization of our armed forces are eliminated and that funds budgeted for modernization are, in fact, spent to the fullest. The Congress is committed to maintaining a credible nuclear weapons programme while at the same time it will evolve demonstrable and verifiable confidence-building measures with its nuclear neighbours. The welfare of ex-servicemen will occupy urgent attention and plans will he expeditiously prepared for involving them in crucial nation-building tasks. A new Department of Ex-Servicemen's Welfare will be set up in the Ministry of Defence. The long-pending issue of one-rank, one-pension will once again be re examined and the satisfactory solution arrived at expeditiously. The Congress will make the National Security Council a professional and effective institution. It will immediately have a discussion in Parliament on the Subrahmanyam Committee report on Kargil and move resolutely to implement its recommendations to strengthen our intelligence networks. The Congress has been consistent, unlike the BJP, on the issue of dialogue with Pakistan on all issues including Jammu and Kashmir. It has always advocated formal and informal talks on the basis of the historic Shimla Agreement of 1972. At the same time, the Congress is firm in its view that Pakistan’s sponsorship of cross-border terrorism must end completely once and for all. If it continues, then the Indian state has the responsibility to protect its citizens. The Congress will expand trade and investment relations with China and with countries of East Asia. It will revive the country’s close ties with West Asia and other non-aligned countries. It will reaffirm our traditional bonds with countries like Russia, Japan and the European Union. It will engage the United States in scientific, technological, strategic and commercial cooperation. It will take the leadership to strengthen SAARC and launch major regional projects in areas like energy and water that will bring benefits to all countries of our region. 

Regional Development

As always, the Congress will work for balanced regional development. India’s northeast demands and will receive special treatment with particular emphasis on roads, power, tourism, communication and handicrafts. Without the restoration of law and order and a firm approach to combating militancy, no development can be sustained in the northeast. The northeast will emerge as a gateway to East Asia with which India is building new economic relationships. The Congress also takes note of growing inter-state disparities that have led to some important states like UP and Bihar to fall behind in social development and economic growth. While state governments have the final responsibility for governance, the central government has still an important role in ensuring that the lagging states improve their performance through fiscal and other policies. In view of the importance of state-level reforms, the Congress will set up a Systems Reforms Commission to work out, in cooperation with state governments, the details of state-level reforms that are needed to accelerate growth and improve the quality of basic social services. A structured and transparent approach to alleviate the burden of debt on states so as to enable them to increase social sector investments will be adopted. 

Administrative, Police, Judicial and Electoral Reforms

An Administrative Reforms Commission will be established to prepare a detailed blueprint for revamping the public administration system completely so as to make it more performance-oriented and accountable. While basic governance is the priority, e-governance will be promoted on a massive scale in areas of concern to the common man particularly, like land records, tax administration, etc. All government agencies but particularly those that deal with citizens on a day-to-day basis must operate in a responsive and accountable manner. The Right to Information Act at the centre will he made more progressive, meaningful and useful to the public. The monitoring and implementation of the Act will he made more participatory and the penalty clauses regarding delays, illegal denials and other inadequacies relating to the supply of information to the public will be operationalised soon. Protection will be extended to all “whistleblowers” through statutory means, if necessary. The police force will function in an impartial, professional, effective and humane manner. The special needs of police families, especially in education and housing, will be taken care of in adequate measure. More women will encourage to join the police force. Immediate measures will be taken to drastically cut delays in courts, particularly in the High Courts and in lower levels of the judiciary. Legal aid services will be aided. Alternative dispute settlement mechanisms will be strengthened. A new system of nyaya panchavats will be instituted. The Congress is deeply committed to electoral reforms. It was the first party to set up a committee to review its system of financing to ensure maximum transparency. The report of that committee is in the public domain and the Congress is on the path of its implementation. It was the only party to welcome last years Supreme Court order on disclosure by candidates that was opposed by the BJP and it allies. The Congress will tackle the root causes of corruption and the generation of black money. To a large extent, deregulation, removal of laws that have outlived their utility or have not fulfilled their social purpose, transparency in party financing and state funding of elections will help. Even so, the Congress is conscious of the havoc that corruption at all levels adds to the harassment of the common man and is determined to rid the country of this scourge. 

Industry

Revival of industrial growth is of paramount importance. Incentives for boosting private investment will be introduced. The system of approvals of foreign direct investment will be made more transparent. Indian industry will be encouraged in every manner to enhance its global presence. Competition, both domestic and external, will be deepened across industry with professionally-run regulatory institutions in place to ensure that the competition is free and fair. These regulatory institutions will protect the interests of consumers. The Congress will strengthen the public sector in key, strategic areas, including infrastructure. It will help public sector companies in these areas to emerge as global companies. There is still an important role for the public sector as a venture capitalist in new and emerging areas. Public sector companies that can he revived through new management will be identified. The great advantage of the public sector still lies in starting new projects, while the great advantage of the private sector lies in running them commercially. Public-private synergies will be fostered. The Congress will approach privatization selectively. Disinvestment will not be resorted to merely to raise revenue to meet short-term targets, as the NDA has been doing. Disinvestment revenues will be used for designated social development programmes. The Congress will ensure that disinvestment increases competition and consumer welfare. The Congress will establish a National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council to provide a continuing forum for policy interactions to energise and sustain the growth of the manufacturing industry like food processing, textiles, engineering, consumer goods, pharmaceuticals, leather, capital goods, industrial machinery and IT hardware. A massive push will be given to the applications of IT particularly. Household and artisanal manufacturing industry that is the lifeline of many towns and cities across the country will be modernized and given greater technological, investment and marketing support. The Congress is committed to a modern, world-class financial sector that also fulfills social objectives. Competition in the financial sector will be expanded. Public sector banks will be given full managerial autonomy. Banks will be encouraged in every way to expand lending, particularly to agriculture, agro-industry, value-added agriculture, small-scale industry and infrastructure. Interest rates must be such so as to stimulate not just investments but is also provide adequate returns to savers. 

Fiscal Policy

The Congress reiterates its firm commitment to eliminating the revenue deficit of the central government in five years time so as to release more resources for investments in social and physical infrastructure. A detailed roadmap for accomplishing this will he unveiled within 30 days of coming to power so that a national consensus is also created. The Congress will undertake major tax reforms to significantly expand the base of taxpayers, to substantially increase tax compliance and to make the tax administration more citizen-friendly. Without increasing tax rates, the Congress believes that the present Tax:GDP ratio of 14-15% must he raised to at least 18% by the end of the decade. VAT will be introduced in close cooperation and consultation with trade and industry. This will enhance the competitiveness of Indian industry and also check tax evasion. 

Implementation of Manifesto

Within 100 days of receiving the mandate of the people of our country, the Congress will release a detailed action plan with milestones for governance based largely on the promises and commitments made in this manifesto. Every year on October 2nd, the Congress pledges to present to the people of India a Jan Dastavejh on the progress of implementation of the manifesto. 

AN APPEAL

The Congress approaches the people of India with the utmost humility, conscious of its accomplishments and the many challenges that lie ahead.

A vote for the Congress is a vote for preserving India’s many unities and celebrating its many diversities.

A vote for the Congress is a vote for the steady hand of experience and expertise, a vote for compassion in economic policy, for conviction in social policy, for consistency in foreign policy and for clarity in governance and administration.

A vote for the Congress is a vote for a vision of India that has an equal and dignified place for each and every one of its citizens, in which there is equality of opportunity for all to fulfill their aspirations.

The Congress is asking the people of India to vote for it on the strength of the Congress’s contributions, its commitments, its concerns and its charter. 

The Congress has received the support and trust of the people of India for decades. It has always tried to fulfill that trust in substantial measure.

For economic growth with social harmony, vote Congress.

For economic growth that benefits all sections of our society, and fulfills the aspirations of all Indians, vote Congress.

For economic growth that brings prosperity first and foremost to rural India, vote Congress.

For clarity, conviction, compassion and consistency in governance and administration, vote Congress.
Table of Contents
I.	 Preface	

1

II.	 Why Congress?	

2

III.	Achievements Of The Congress-led UPA Government: 2004-2009	

6

IV.	 The Way Forward: 2009-2014	

9

V. 	 An Appeal	

21

II. Why Congress ?

I. Preface
Elections to the 15th Lok Sabha are to be held shortly.

These are national elections.

This is the time for you to choose your government at the Centre.
The Indian National Congress respectfully seeks a renewed mandate from the people.

While there will be regional, state-level and local issues that are important, these are elections for
a government at the Centre, one that will govern all of India in its many diversities and fulfill its
multitude of hopes and aspirations.

We pledge to continue our work to ensure a life of SECURITY, DIGNITY AND PROSPERITY
for every citizen.

It is only the Indian National Congress that is anchored in the larger vision of India as a nation, while
at the same time being sensitive to regional and local sentiments.

The Indian National Congress seeks this mandate on the strength of the performance of the
Congress-led UPA government during 2004-09.

It is only the Indian National Congress that has demonstrated its commitment to a strong Centre, to
strong States, and to strong panchayats and nagarpalikas. India’s political system must have space for
institutions at each of these three levels. Each has a vital and specific role to play.

We made promises in our manifesto of 2004.
We have delivered on them in a very substantial measure.
The Indian National Congress seeks a fresh mandate on the basis of its core values and
ideology — secularism, nationalism, social justice, and economic growth for all, especially for
the aam admi.
We seek a fresh mandate on the basis of our heritage, record of service and vision of the future.
We reaffirm our unflinching commitment to the welfare of all our people, especially to the well-being
of the weaker sections of our society.
The Indian National Congress is the only party that appeals to, and derives its strength from, each
and every section of our society.
The Indian National Congress is the only party that believes that economic growth and communal
harmony, and economic growth and social justice, are two sides of the same coin and must always go
hand-in-hand.

The Indian National Congress is fighting these elections in alliance with like-minded parties
in some States. These parties share the progressive vision and values of the Congress. Over the
past five years, the Indian National Congress has managed a coalition government at the Centre,
accommodating the views of its partners but without compromising on any of the essential principles
of nation-building.
Even so, what India needs most today -- what every Indian needs most today – at the national level is
a party with an All-India perspective and with an All-India presence. The Indian National Congress
is the only such party.
The Indian National Congress is the party that, under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi, led
our people into freedom from colonial rule. It is the party whose leadership, by the admission of
Dr. Ambedkar himself, made our Constitution possible.
The Indian National Congress is the party that, under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru,
established the foundations of the modern Indian nation-state with its abiding commitment to
parliamentary democracy, secularism, economic development, and science and technology.

The Indian National Congress is the only party that combines experience and youth, wisdom and
exuberance, achievement and ambition.

1

2

Learning from experience at every step, the Indian National Congress is the party that has responded
creatively to the challenges of the times through the establishment of a vast public sector manufacturing
base in the fifties; through bank nationalization and the Green and White Revolutions spearheaded by
Indira Gandhi in the late-sixties and seventies; through prudent liberalization and the IT Revolution
created by Rajiv Gandhi in the eighties; bolder economic reforms in the nineties; and unprecedented
economic growth over the past five years. It is the only party that is forward-looking, the only party that
believes a better future is the right of every Indian.

Third Front – a recipe for chaos

The achievements of India since 1947 are the achievements of its people – of its farmers and farm labour,
its organized sector and unorganized sector workers, its managers, its scientists and engineers, its teachers,
doctors and other professionals, its entrepreneurs and businesspersons. It has been the privilege of the
Indian National Congress to have provided the political leadership that heralded these accomplishments
under the Prime Ministerships of Jawaharlal Nehru, Lal Bahadur Shastri, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi,
P.V. Narasimha Rao and Dr. Manmohan Singh.

Left Parties, who are prime movers behind the so-called Third Front, supported the Congress-led UPA
government for over four years. They attempted to exercise authority without taking on any responsibility.
At every step, they violated the discipline, restraint and sobriety so very essential for running a coalition
smoothly. At every step, the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, briefed them on all important issues.
The Left Parties withdrew their support on the issue of the civilian nuclear agreement even though it had
been negotiated and concluded on our own terms. They adamantly refused to listen to reasoned arguments
that convincingly demonstrated that the agreement was in India’s supreme national interest.

Congress vs BJP: Secular, Liberal Nationalism vs Narrow Communalism
The Indian National Congress has always been in the forefront of the battle against those forces that seek
to divide and fragment our society.
The Indian National Congress has always been the bulwark against the four “isms” that threaten to tear
our country apart -- commnalism of all kinds, linguistic chauvinism, regional parochialism and casteism.
At the national level, the BJP has sought to position itself as the main political rival of the
Indian National Congress.
The Indian National Congress rejects this presumptuous posturing since the BJP is simply not present in
large parts of our country.
Even so, the contest between the Indian National Congress and the BJP is not just a fight between two
political parties. It is, in essence, a clash between two competing visions of Indian nationalism, between
two competing visions of what India should be.
The Indian National Congress’s secular and liberal nationalism has an equal place for each and every
Indian. It is an inclusive vision. The BJP’s narrow and communal nationalism denies equality and equal
rights to large sections of our people. It is an exclusionary doctrine.
The Indian National Congress’s secular and liberal nationalism is founded on a celebration of India’s
many diversities. The BJP’s narrow and communal nationalism rejects many of these diversities and seeks
to impose an artificial uniformity on our people.
The Indian National Congress practices the politics of consensus and cooperation The BJP practices the
politics of divisiveness and discord. Instinctively, the Indian National Congress unites, while the BJP
divides.

3

There is also the so-called Third Front, a grouping of opportunistic parties. These parties have neither
consistency nor clarity. They have neither competence nor commitment. This Front, grounded in the
politics of convenience, is nothing but a platform for personal ambitions. It speaks of “alternative polices”
without spelling out what these alternatives are. Parties of the Third Front do one thing when they are in
power and quite another when they are rejected by the people.

The Left Parties and their present partners pride themselves on being secular. On the contrary, it may be
recalled that they had actively aligned with the BJP in the past.
They are, in fact, responsible for the electoral growth of the BJP.
As past experience has shown, the Third Front is a recipe for political instability. Lacking a natural
national anchor, it is a recipe for chaos, not cohesion.
Only a united India can fight terrorism
The integrity and security of India are paramount. Terrorism threatens many countries, including India.
Terrorism knows no religion and it respects no political boundary. It is, as has become painfully evident,
not confined to any community or any political persuasion. Its method is the mindless use of violence
directed at the innocent in the most cowardly manner.
Let it be very clear — terrorism must be fought relentlessly, intelligently and wisely, and without fear or
favour. Terrorism can be fought only by a united people, not by a people divided by religion. Religious
polarization that is intrinsic to the BJP severely erodes our capacity to combat terrorism.
It is only the Indian National Congress that can deal with the scourge of terrorism squarely and decisively
but without weakening the delicate strands that have, together, bound our society for centuries.
Dealing with terrorism aided and abetted from across our borders does not require a “muscular” foreign
policy as advocated by the BJP. The country knows the heavy price that was paid for such a “muscular”
foreign policy—stupor in Kargil, surrender in Kandahar and stalemate in Operation Parakram.
What India needs is an intelligent and wise foreign policy, a foreign policy that is rooted in our traditions,
gives us strength through our unity and common purpose, and radiates confidence.

4

After the November 2008 attacks on Mumbai, the Congress-led UPA government mounted a forceful
diplomatic campaign. It was this campaign that led to Pakistan admitting, for the first time, that Pakistani
citizens were responsible for the attacks. That admission was a notable victory for our well thought out
foreign policy.
The Middle Path – the Congress’s way
Balance—or the middle path--has always been the hall-mark of the policies of the Indian National
Congress.
As the world experiences a severe recession, it is this balance that is standing India in good stead.
It is a balance between the public sector and the private sector, with an important role assigned to
cooperatives and self-help groups.
It is a balance between building a modern economy and imparting a new thrust to traditional industries.
It is a balance between promoting employment in the organized sector and protecting livelihoods in the
unorganized sector.

III. Achievements of the Congress-led UPA Government
The tireless campaign of Smt. Sonia Gandhi, President of the Indian National Congress resulted in its
return to the 14th Lok Sabha as the single largest party after eight years in the Opposition. She took
the initiative to give shape to the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) comprising of the Indian National
Congress, its pre-poll allies and supporting like-minded parties. As chairperson of the UPA, Smt. Sonia
Gandhi, along with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, negotiated a Common Minimum Programme
that became the basis of governance of the coalition.
The May 2004 mandate was for a government that would be responsive to the concerns of the aam admi
and to the needs of the poor, the deprived and the disadvantaged.
This has been achieved in very substantial measure.
The May 2004 mandate was for a government that would accelerate economic growth but with a focus
always on livelihoods and jobs, on inclusive growth and on social justice.
This has been achieved in very substantial measure.

It is a balance between addressing the needs of urban India and improving the quality of life and standard
of living in our villages and towns.

The May 2004 mandate was for a government that would take forward the agenda of empowerment of the
weaker sections of society in a forthright manner with emphasis on education.

It is a balance between taking advantage of globalization and ensuring that these benefits flow to local
communities.

This has been achieved in substantial measure. The May 2004 mandate was for a government that would
bridge all divides, that would bring all sections of society together, and give them voice.

It is a balance between regulation by the government and unleashing the creative spirits of our entrepreneurs
and professionals.

This has been achieved in substantial measure.

It is only the Indian National Congress that cherishes and practices this balance in all spheres of our
national life including in the conduct of economic and foreign policy.

The Major Accomplishments: 2004-2009

This balance is needed now more than ever.

We let the record speak for itself.
The accomplishments of the Congress-led UPA government since May 2004 have been tangible and
visible. The manifesto of the Indian National Congress for the 2004 Lok Sabha elections provided the
foundation for the National Common Minimum Programme that formed the basis of governance during
the past five years. The pledges made in this manifesto have been translated into reality by the Congressled UPA government.
• 	It has restored secular and Constitutional values in governance. It has also made administration
markedly more transparent. The Right to Information Act, 2005 is a historic legislation. It is enabling
lakhs of our citizens in villages, towns and cities to demand responsiveness and accountability from
public officials and government at all levels.
• 	It has enacted the path-breaking National Rural Employment Guarantee Act which is being implemented
in all districts to provide 100 days of legally guaranteed employment to each rural household seeking
employment in public works programmes. Not only has livelihood security been provided to many lakh
poor rural families but durable community assets have also been created.

5

6

• 	It has started and achieved considerable progress on the ambitious Bharat Nirman programme to
transform rural India by expanding and providing irrigation, all-weather roads, houses for the poor,
drinking water, electricity for all poor families and phone connectivity in all villages.
• 	It has brought comfort and hope to crores of our farmers and their families by (i) increasing the MSP
and procurement prices; (ii) by waiving loans to the tune of Rs 65,000 crore; (iii) by increasing threefold
credit from banks and reducing interest rates on crop loans; and (iv) by extending irrigation facilities.

• 	It has ensured that all States in the country received financial resources from the Centre for development
schemes and programmes at a scale never known before. Unlike the NDA’s record during 1999-2004, no
State has faced discrimination in the matter of funds from the Central Government. Sensitive States of
the northeast and Jammu and Kashmir have benefited enormously and are seeing development activities
on a very large scale. For the first time, the Backward Regions Grant Fund with an annual allocation of
over Rs 5000 crore for 250 of the poorest districts is being implemented through panchayats.

• 	It has launched the National Rural Health Mission which has already made a positive impact by
improving the quality and accessibility of primary health care in villages. More children are now being
delivered under the care of trained health professionals. Around six and a half lakh women have been
trained and posted as accredited social health activists (ASHAs).

•	 It has earned for India a new respect and stature internationally. Civil nuclear agreements have been
entered into with many countries entirely on our terms. India has today a place of honour in every
global forum. The sustained campaign led by the Congress President has resulted in the declaration of
Gandhi Jayanti as International Day of Non-Violence by the United Nations.

• 	It has significantly empowered the weaker sections of society by (i) giving scheduled tribes and
traditional forest dwellers rights over land they cultivate in forest areas; (ii) by providing reservations
for OBC students in all professional institutions; (iii) by passing a new law to protect women from
domestic violence; (iv) by giving women equal rights to inherit property; and (v) by enhancing hugely
the scholarships for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, minorities and OBCs to pursue college and
university education.

•	 It has considerably strengthened the country’s capacity and capability to deal with both external and
internal security challenges. New battalions have been raised and new hubs for anti-terrorist forces
created across the country. A new National Investigation Agency has also been established. Significant
success has been recorded in the fight against insurgency in some northeastern States and J&K. The
record turnout in the recent assembly polls in J&K by people braving calls of boycott and threats of
violence is a tribute to their desire for peace and a vindication of the approach adopted by the Indian
National Congress and the Prime Minister personally. The security forces have also successfully foiled
the plans of Naxalites to expand their nefarious activities. We have raised our level of preparedness to
meet any terrorist threat or attack.

• It has imparted a new momentum to the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan for primary education. It has also
introduced a cooked mid-day meal scheme in all primary schools that feeds 15 crore children every day.
At the same time, it has for the first time in five decades, increased the number of colleges, universities,
and institutes of technology, management and information technology. The investment in higher
education in the XIth Five Year Plan (2007-08 to 2011-12) will witness a huge increase – five times the
investment in the previous five years.
• 	It has delivered five years of record economic growth. This has enabled an unprecedented step-up in
government spending particularly on (i) education and health; (ii) on agriculture and rural development;
(iii) infrastructure like power and railways; and (iv) municipal services in towns and cities. This
economic growth has enabled the introduction of the Aam Admi Bima Yojana (life insurance cover) for
one and a half crore landless households, the Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (medical insurance cover)
for six crore unorganized sector workers living below the poverty line and the Indira Gandhi National
Old Age Pension scheme for elder citizens over 65 years of age and living below the poverty line.
• 	It has initiated the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) with an outlay of
Rs.1 lakh crore in 63 cities for upgrading infrastructure and for providing basic services to the urban
poor. Work amounting to over Rs.42,000 crore is in progress covering areas like water supply, sanitation
and urban transport. 14 lakh houses for the poor are under construction. Governance reforms under
JNNURM has increased the availability of housing in the 63 cities. A major programme for improving
power supply in 1,420 towns and cities has also begun.

7

8

IV. The Way Forward
The Indian National Congress says what it means and means what it says.
The Indian National Congress promises what it can do and will do what it promises.
The Indian National Congress is irrevocably committed to ensuring that government functions in the
interest of the people for whom it exists and for whom it works.
The Indian National Congress has always believed that the correct approach to governance is to address
the daily concerns of the people and solve their problems. It is to be responsive and accountable to the
needs of the people. It is that governance is a partnership between the electors and the elected and that
the perceived gap between the people and those in power must be significantly narrowed.
Dr Manmohan Singh as Prime Minister has led the country with dignity and firm resolve. His integrity,
maturity and wisdom, together with his unique expertise and experience, makes him best qualified to lead
the nation and handle the many challenges that India faces, both at home and abroad.
Towards faster and more inclusive growth
The Indian National Congress is fully aware that the world economy faces the worst crisis in 50 years.
This crisis has been caused by a failure of financial markets in the USA and in other developed countries.
However, the Indian economy has shown considerable resilience under the most adverse international
circumstances. This is the outcome of the policies of successive Congress governments. This is the direct
result of a vibrant public sector that is the legacy of Jawaharlal Nehru, government ownership of banks
that is the legacy of Indira Gandhi, and a strong private sector that matured and flowered during the
tenure of Rajiv Gandhi and thereafter.

In keeping with the promises made in our 2004 Manifesto, the Congress-led UPA government had set
up a number of very important commissions including the Administrative Reforms Commission, the
National Commission on Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector, the National Farmers Commission,
the National Knowledge Commission and the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council. Their
valuable recommendations will be taken up for implementation in a systematic manner and without any
delay.

The Work Programme: 2009-2014
In addition to consolidating and taking forward the numerous missions, programmes and schemes
launched during 2004-2009, the Indian National Congress makes the following solemn promises to the
people of our country.

• We will guarantee the maximum possible security to each and every citizen.
Our policy is zero tolerance towards terrorism from whatever source it originates. We have already
initiated the process of equipping our police and other specialist security forces with the latest weapons
and technology to meet terrorist threats. This process will be taken forward vigourously. More specialist
battalions will be raised and positioned in key locations across the country.
Citizenship is a right and a matter of pride. With the huge IT expertise available in our country, it is
possible to provide every Indian with a unique identity card after the publication of the national population
register in the year 2011.

• We will ensure the highest level of defence preparedness and also take further steps for the
welfare of the defence forces and their families

The average rate of economic growth during the self-declared India Shining period of the BJP was just
5.8% per year, as compared to 8.5% during the five year tenure of the Congress-led UPA government.
2008-09 has proved to be a difficult year for growth, yet the Indian economy will grow at about 7%. That
is why our immediate priority is to revive the economy and restore the high growth witnessed in the first
four years of the Congress-led UPA Government.

During the BJP-led NDA government, over Rs 24,000 crore of funds meant for defence modernisation
were simply not spent. In the last five years, modernisation of our defence forces has resumed substantially.
This will continue at a rapid pace. The Indian National Congress also pledges to make India’s defence
forces technology-enabled and equipped with modern weapons, aircraft, ships and delivery systems to
repel any threat from land, sea or air.

The Indian National Congress will put in place measures to ensure that the momentum of growth is
maintained. Three stimulus packages have already been announced. Interest rates have been reduced.
Credit flows to industry have been encouraged and assured. The impact of these policies will be felt in the
coming weeks and months.

Recognizing their special concerns, a new and separate department of ex-servicemen’s welfare was
established in 2004 by the Congress-led UPA Government. Ex-servicemen constitute a large cadre of
dedicated and trained persons. We will utilize them extensively in crucial nation-building tasks.

• We will accelerate the process of police reforms

The focus of the new measures will be to stimulate demand in the domestic economy and to ensure that
there is more purchasing power in the hands of the people and more liquidity in the hands of companies.
Public investment in agriculture and infrastructure, which has increased appreciably over the past five
years, will be stepped up further. Within 45 days of forming the new Government, the Indian National
Congress will present the regular Budget for the year 2009-10 with the basic objective of returning to the
path of faster and more inclusive growth, which is so essential for fulfilling all our social and economic
objectives

The Indian National Congress recognizes the imperative of police reforms. A clear distinction between
the political executive and police administration will be made. The police force will be better provisioned
especially in the matter of housing and education facilities; the police force will be made more
representative of the diversity our population; and police recruitment will be made more effective and
training professionalized to confront new and emerging threats. Accountability of the police force will be
institutionalized.

9

10

• We will build on the success of the NREGA and take the scheme forward.
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, first promised by the Indian National Congress in its
2004 Lok Sabha elections manifesto, has been an outstanding success.
While drawing on the lessons of various social audits, the Indian National Congress now pledges at least
100 days of work at a real wage of Rs 100 a day for everyone as an entitlement under the NREGA.

• Along the lines of NREGA, we will enact a National Food Security Act
The Indian National Congress pledges to enact a Right to Food law that guarantees access to sufficient
food for all people, particularly the most vulnerable sections of society. The Indian National Congress
pledges that every family living below the poverty line either in rural or urban areas will be entitled, by
law, to 25 kgs of rice or wheat per month at Rs 3 per kg. Subsidised community kitchens will be set up in
all cities for homeless people and migrants with the support of the Central government.

• We will guarantee health security for all
The National Rural Health Mission has already begun to make a noticeable impact and will be implemented
with an even greater sense of urgency. The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) introduced by the
Congress-led UPA Government offers health insurance for poor families. Expenditure on health is a
major cause of indebtedness, particularly in rural areas. The Indian National Congress pledges that every
family living below the poverty line will be covered by the RSBY over the next three years. Every district
headquarters hospital will be upgraded to provide quality heath facilities to all.

• We will ensure comprehensive social security to those at special risk
The Indian National Congress will ensure a comprehensive cover of social security to all persons who
are at special risk including (i) single-woman headed households; (ii) disabled and the elderly; (iii) urban
homeless; (iv) released bonded workers; (v) members of primitive tribal groups; and (vi) members of
designated “most backward” dalit communities.

• We will be make quality education affordable to everyone
India today has one of the largest educational loan programmes in the world. Over the past five years,
over fifteen lakh students have received loans totaling more than Rs 26,000 crore and are pursuing various
professional courses.
The Indian National Congress now pledges that all students admitted to any recognized course in any
recognized college/university will be provided, on a need basis, either a scholarship or an educational loan
without collateral repayable over a very long period.
In order to ensure quality school education for all children, we have already made a beginning by approving
the setting up of one model school in every block of the country.

The Indian National Congress pledges to focus more sharply on outcomes and achievement levels in
education and not just on enrolment. It also pledges a major programme for training of teachers and
improving the physical environment in schools.
A massive expansion in higher education has been undertaken in the past two years—8 new IITs, 7 new
IIMs, 5 new Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research, 30 new Central Universities, 20 new
Indian Institutes of Information Technology and 374 new colleges in educationally-deprived districts.
The Indian National Congress pledges to ensure that these expansion plans are implemented fully with
their twin focus on excellence and affirmative action.

• We will implement a nation-wide skill development programme
India is a young country with 70% of the population below the age of 35. To reap the “demographic
dividend”, the Indian National Congress believes that there is an urgent need to put in place an extensive
skill development programme so that the employability of youth is enhanced. The Congress-led UPA
government has already put in place a National Skills Development Mission. Rs 30,000 crore will be
invested in this mission which is of crucial importance for the future of our youth. Funds will be provided
to ensure its widest possible coverage. A wider and more comprehensive spectrum of skills will be
imparted.

• We will expand schemes for improving well-being of farmers and their families
In addition to continuing the programmes that were launched over the past five years, the Indian National
Congress pledges that every small and marginal farmer in the country will have access to bank credit at
lower rates of interest. While the massive loan waiver scheme has already been implemented and 3.68
crore farmer-families have benefited from it, the Indian National Congress now pledges to extend interest
relief to all farmers who repay bank loans on schedule.
The Indian National Congress is determined to ensure that farming becomes a profitable occupation.
All measures in support of this objective will be taken. Programmes for agricultural diversification, agriprocessing and rural industrialization will be pursued systematically. Dairying, aquaculture, fisheries,
horticulture and sericulture will receive an additional boost. The special needs of crops like tea, coffee,
rubber, spices, cashew and coconut will be met. A renewed emphasis will be placed on wasteland
development and afforestation.
The Indian National Congress will implement comprehensive crop insurance schemes and will also
examine the feasibility of direct income support to farmers in the ecologically vulnerable regions of the
country. Minimum Support Price (MSP) and procurement will be ensured at the doorsteps of farmers.
All controls on the free movement of farm commodities and processing of agricultural products and all
regulations that depress incomes of farmers will be systematically eliminated.

Every year, over the next five years, we will add one more model school in every block.
11

12

The Indian National Congress is firmly committed to ensuring that farmers get, at a very minimum, market
rates for the land that is acquired for industrial projects. The Indian National Congress also believes that
farmers should be given an option to become stakeholders in such industrial ventures. As a matter of
priority, the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Bill, 2007, that could not be passed because of the
obstructionist tactics of the BJP, will be taken up for passage in the 15th Lok Sabha. The Land Acquisition
Act, 1894 will also be amended to ensure that the interests of land-owners are more than adequately
protected.

• We will democratize and professionalize the functioning of cooperatives
The Indian cooperative movement comprising about 5 lakh cooperatives with more than 22 crore
members is the largest such movement in the world. It plays a crucial role in our development. The
Indian National Congress has always stood for its democratic, autonomous and professional functioning
and this will be ensured by enacting appropriate laws, including making a Constitutional provision.

• We will give even greater impetus to the empowerment of weaker sections of society.
The empowerment of the weaker sections of society — scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, OBCs, minorities
and women — has been an article of faith with the Indian National Congress. This will be carried forward
with emphasis on education, particularly skill-based and professional education.
Education at all stages — primary, secondary and university — will be free in all respects for boys and girls
belonging to dalit and adivasi communities.
Coaching fees for all entrance exams for at least one lakh scheduled caste/scheduled tribe students every
year will be paid by the Central Government. National scholarships for boys and girls belonging to
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes will be further increased.

For the first time, a separate Ministry of Minority Affairs was created in May 2004 and the Rajinder Sachar
Committee was set up to look into the social, economic and educational status of the Muslim community
in the country. The implementation of the recommendations of the Sachar Committee is already under
way and an Equal Opportunity Commission will be established by law. Nearly four lakh scholarships
have been awarded over the past two years alone for pre-matric, post-matric and professional courses,
with more than 50% of these being awarded to girl students. The Prime Minister’s 15-point programme
was launched in June 2006 with physical and financial targets for minorities in all welfare programmes of
the Central Government. A special development package for the 90 minority-concentration districts in
different states has been introduced.
The Indian National Congress is irrevocably committed to ensuring that the Constitutional rights of all
minorities are protected fully, that the representation of minorities in public administration increases
substantially, and that minorities recognize that the government is working for their welfare at all times.
The Indian National Congress has pioneered reservations for minorities in Kerala, Karnataka and Andhra
Pradesh in government employment and education on the basis of their social and economic backwardness.
We are committed to adopt this policy at the national level. A Wakf Development Corporation will be
established to develop wakf properties. A National Unani University will be set up. The corpus of the
Maulana Azad Educational Foundation will be doubled.
The Indian National Congress introduced reservation for women in panchayats and nagarpalikas. Today,
about 40% of the elected representatives in panchayats are women, compared to a reservation of 33%
mandated for them. This is nothing short of a quiet revolution. The Indian National Congress will ensure
that the Bill for reserving 33% of the seats in the Lok Sabha and the State legislatures is passed in the 15th
Lok Sabha and that the elections to the 16th Lok Sabha are held on the basis of one-third reservation for
women.

The Indian National Congress will take steps to ensure that allocations under the Special Component
Plan for scheduled castes and the Tribal Sub-Plan for scheduled tribes (first introduced by Indira Gandhi
over three decades ago) are made in accordance with their proportions in the population.

Over the next five years, the Indian National Congress will endeavour to ensure that at least half of the
country’s rural women population will be enrolled as members of self-help groups linked with banks and
that they will get loans from banks at moderate interest rates. The Indian National Congress also proposes
to reserve one-third of all central government jobs for women.

An unprecedented special drive was launched by the Prime Minister and over 53,000 vacancies in
government have been filled through direct recruitment or promotion ofmembers belonging to scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes. This drive will continue.

The Indian National Congress believes that, in addition to education, business development programmes
are needed on a larger-scale for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and women. Preferential policies will be
adopted in government contracts to stimulate entrepreneurial activities amongst these groups.

The Indian National Congress is deeply committed to pursuing affirmative action for scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes in the private sector. It has already initiated a national debate on this issue. It also pledges
to carve out a reservation for the economically weaker sections of all communities without prejudice to
existing reservations for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and OBCs.

Social security schemes for occupations like weavers, fishermen and fisherwomen, toddy tappers, leather
workers, plantation labour, construction labour, mine workers and beedi workers will be expanded.

13

14

The Indian National Congress is deeply committed to ensuring equality of opportunity and full participation
of persons with disabilities, including the blind, in all sectors of life. To begin with, a comprehensive
review of laws and programmes will be undertaken and the shortcomings noticed in their implementation
will be removed.

• We will combat communalism of all kinds and caste atrocities with determination

• We will connect all villages to a broadband network in three years time

The Indian National Congress reiterates its unflinching resolve to combat communalism of all kinds and
to deal ruthlessly with those perpetrating atrocities on weaker sections like dalits and women. The Indian
National Congress believes in ensuring the right to compensation and rehabilitation for all victims of
communal, ethnic and caste violence on standards and levels that are binding on every government. The
Indian National Congress will propose a law that empowers the National Human Rights Commission to
monitor investigation and trial in all cases of communal and caste violence.

While connectivity across the country has increased manifold in recent years, the Indian National Congress
pledges to bring the fruits of the IT revolution to more cities and towns. It also pledges to connect every
village to a broadband network within three years. This will help locate new, non-agricultural jobs in
villages and open vast new opportunities for our rural youth. Thus the vision of Rajiv Gandhi — the use
of IT for rural transformation -- will be realized in even greater measure. Already, IT is being used in areas
like computerization of land records but we now promise a bolder, time-bound initiative.

The Indian National Congress will bring school curricula of various communal and sectarian organizations
— regardless of their affiliation —under the regulatory purview of an empowered national body.

• We will give special focus to the small entrepreneur and to small and medium enterprises

• We will bring a sharp focus on the special needs of children, especially the girl child
For the first time, a National Commission for Protection of Child Rights was established in 2006. The
Commission’s mandate is to ensure that the welfare of children as guaranteed by various laws is protected
and promoted. New laws have also been passed to prohibit child labour and child marriage. New schemes
to improve the nutritional status of children, especially girls, and to educate them have been launched in
the past five years. Over 18 lakh anganwadi workers and helpers have benefited from an increase in their
remuneration last year.
The Indian National Congress commits itself to the universalisation of the ICDS by March 2012 and
to provide an anganwadi in every habitation and full coverage of children up to the age of six for food,
nutrition and pre-school education. The special requirements of children of migrant workers in towns
and cities will be met through new programmes in association with civil society organizations. A number
of programmes have already been launched to combat the still widely-prevalent phenomenon of child
malnutrition and these will be infused with an even greater sense of urgency.
The Indian National Congress will introduce special incentives for the girl child to correct the adverse
sex ratio and to ensure education of girl children. Girl children in districts that have an adverse sex ratio
and/or low enrolment of girls, monetary incentives will be given to the girl child to be credited to the girl
child’s account on her completing primary school, middle school, secondary school and higher secondary
school.

• We will make elected panchayat institutions financially strong
Thanks entirely to the tireless efforts of Rajiv Gandhi, there are some 2,50,000 elected panchayat bodies
all over the country with almost 32 lakh elected representatives. It is through such institutions that we
will ensure inclusive governance which is essential for inclusive economic growth. The Indian National
Congress is unwavering in its commitment to full Constitutionally-mandated devolution of funds,
functions and functionaries to the panchayats. The annual allocations to gram panchayats that can be
used for purposes designated as priority by the gram sabha will be substantially stepped up.

Small and medium enterprises and the self-employed are the backbone of our industrial and service
economy. They are the major generators of productive employment for our youth. The Indian National
Congress pledges a “new deal” for SMEs and for first-generation entrepreneurs by assuring them greater
access to collateral-free credit, liberating them from the multiplicity of laws and forms, and freeing them
from the clutches of inspectors.
The Indian National Congress pledges a targeted cluster-based approach to the growth of SMEs. There are
a very large number of such clusters already in different areas like textiles, food processing, handlooms and
handicrafts, consumer goods, khadi, coir and other traditional industries, and engineering. These clusters,
mostly in small and medium towns, will be given access to finance, technology and marketing and will be
provided vastly improved infrastructure.

• We will maintain the path of high growth with fiscal prudence and low inflation
As the experience of 2004-09 demonstrates so vividly, rapid economic growth creates opportunities for
increased government expenditure in vital areas like education, health, agriculture, social security and
infrastructure. Average growth in the first four years of the Congress-led UPA government was 9% per
year for the first time in our history. We will strive to maintain this momentum with a relentless emphasis
on growth that accelerates the generation of productive jobs for our youth. The Indian National Congress
is also firmly committed to maintaining high growth with low inflation, particularly in relation to prices
of essential agricultural and industrial commodities.
The Indian National Congress reiterates its commitment to the path of fiscal responsibility so that the
ability of the Centre to invest in essential social and physical infrastructure is continuously enhanced.
This will require that all subsidies reach only the truly needy and poor sections of our society. The Indian
National Congress will continue its efforts to create and implement a national consensus on this issue.

The Indian National Congress will also upgrade the technical capabilities of panchayat institutions and
ensure that information technology is used extensively to enhance their effectiveness.

Both the public sector and private sector are essential for India’s continued high growth success story.
The Indian National Congress rejects the policy of blind privatization followed by the BJP-led NDA
government, but believes that the Indian people have every right to own part of the shares of public
sector companies while the government retains majority shareholding. Public sector enterprises in the
manufacturing sector (like energy, transport and telecom) and in the financial sector (like banks and
insurance companies) will remain in the public sector and will be given all support to grow and become
competitive.

15

16

The manufacturing industry in India has seen a revival in recent years and this will be sustained and
deepened, particularly labour-intensive manufacturing. The emphasis in all foreign investment policies
will be maximization of local value-addition and export potential. The Indian National Congress will
ensure that the policies it has put in place for attracting private investment for oil exploration will also be
followed for other mineral resources, including coal and iron-ore.
The Indian National Congress remains committed to ensuring the highest standards of corporate
governance in private companies, especially to protect the interests of small shareholders and small
investors. Regulations will be made to ensure good corporate governance, ethical business practices and
accountability to all stakeholders.

• We will introduce the goods and services tax from April 1, 2010.
The Congress-led UPA government successfully implemented VAT throughout the country. This has
brought abundant revenues to all States. The Indian National Congress now pledges to take the next
decisive step and introduce a moderate goods and services tax (GST). Once GST is implemented, all other
central and state-level indirect taxes such as VAT, excise duty, service tax, entertainment tax, luxury tax,
etc. will stand abolished and bring substantial relief to the aam admi. GST will create a seamless national
common market for our farmers, artisans and entrepreneurs and will boost employment. State finances,
and more importantly the finances of panchayats and nagarpalikas, will be put on a sound foundation.

• We will give a completely new look to urban governance
While the bulk of our population still lives and works in villages, India is rapidly urbanizing. But the
provision of basic infrastructure in towns and cities has not kept pace with its requirements. A massive
programme of low-cost social housing and sanitation is needed to make our urban areas more livable.
Recognizing that our towns and cities are engines of creativity and innovation, the Indian National
Congress pledges to create a new model of urban administration with financially-viable self-government
institutions as the pivot.

• We will offer a new deal to our youth to participate in governance
The Indian National Congress has always been the party that has reposed its confidence in youth. It was
Rajiv Gandhi who gave all 18 year-olds the right to vote and it was he who declared Swami Vivekananda’s
birthday on January 12th as National Youth Day. The IT revolution that has spread in our country has
opened up whole new avenues for our youth.
The Indian National Congress will design and launch a voluntary national youth corps which would
enable young men and women in the age group of 18-23 to serve up to two years in constructive nationbuilding activities for which they will be suitably compensated.

The Indian National Congress has periodically renewed itself by inducting young men and women into
the Party and entrusting them with responsibilities. Under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi, the Indian
National Congress has launched a unique exercise to bring youth from all sections of society and all walks
of life into the political mainstream through the Indian Youth Congress (IYC) and the National Students
Union of India (NSUI). For the very first time in any political party, there are hundreds of elected youth
leaders in Punjab and Uttarakhand. This exercise is now being conducted in Gujarat and Tamil Nadu and
will soon encompass other parts of the country. This is a practical demonstration of the deep commitment
of the Indian National Congress to open new political space and opportunities to our youth.

• We will protect India’s natural environment and take steps to rejuvenate it
The Indian National Congress has declared the sacred Ganga as a “national river”. The Ganga River Basin
Authority has been established with the Prime Minister at its head for ensuring that development needs
are met in an ecologically sustainable manner. This Authority will be accorded the highest priority. Water
security is of paramount concern to the Indian National Congress and steps will be taken to enhance it
measurably for local communities.
India has an enormously rich biodiversity that is under threat on account of various reasons. The Indian
National Congress commits itself to strengthening people’s movements whose objective will be to protect
and preserve our bio-resources and ensure their sustainable use.
Climate change has now emerged as a serious challenge for the world community. India too has begun
to feel its impact in different ways. The Congress-led UPA government has already unveiled a National
Action Plan for Climate Change. It is an acknowledgment of our responsibility to take credible actions
within the overall framework of meeting the development aspirations of our people for higher economic
growth and a higher standard of living. This action plan will be implemented in letter and spirit.

• We will carry out a massive renewal of our extensive science and technology infrastructure
One of the most outstanding legacies of Jawaharlal Nehru is the vast infrastructure for science and
technology that India possesses and which has made so many far-reaching contributions to the country’s
progress — in agriculture, nuclear energy, defence, space, industry, energy, telecom and IT. The Indian
National Congress is firmly commited to extend full support to the modernization and expansion of our
science and technology institutions and will ensure that they attract and retain the best talent from India
and abroad.

• We will pursue judicial reforms to cut delays in courts

The Indian National Congress will also make a beginning to induct youth into organs of government.
As a beginning, it will reserve a proportion of seats in panchayats and nagarpalikas for men and women
below the age of 35 years without detriment to the existing reservations for scheduled castes, scheduled
tribes, OBCs and women.

Although delays in the Supreme Court have come down appreciably in recent years, delays in High
Courts and district courts are still unacceptably high. The Indian National Congress has always been of
the view that justice delayed is justice denied and will therefore pursue judicial reforms to ensure timely
completion of the hearing and disposal of cases. As a reflection of this priority, the Gram Nyayalaya Act,
a key promise of our 2004 Manifesto, was passed by Parliament last year. Setting up of Gram Nyayalayas
at the headquarters of the intermediate panchayats and mobile courts in the rural areas will bring to the
aam admi speedy, affordable and substantial justice.

17

18

• We will continue to be sensitive to regional aspirations
The Indian National Congress is aware that in some large states the persistence of intra-regional
imbalances in development has given rise to the demand for separate states. While it has launched a
number of special programmes and schemes for such regions, recognising the legitimacy of these concerns
and acknowledging that solution may vary from one state to another, the Indian National Congress will
find pragmatic solutions to deal with these demands.

• We will ensure energy security for our country
The last two years have seen a very sharp turnaround in the addition to power generating capacity. This
momentum will be maintained and it will be ensured that the country adds at least 12,000-15,000 mw of
capacity every year through a mix of sources—coal, hydel, nuclear and renewables. Rural electrification
and reduction in distribution losses will be given the highest priority. The Indian National Congress
promises a very significant increase in the share of nuclear power, both through domestic and imported
technology which has now been made possible by the civil nuclear agreements. The pace of oil and gas
exploration will be intensified. India’s oil diplomacy will be pursued aggressively. The Indian National
Congress will implement a scheme to supply energy to poor families at affordable prices.

• We will take further steps to preserve and promote our heritage
India has an extraordinarily rich heritage going back centuries. The Indian National Congress will take
further steps to protect, preserve and promote this heritage and ensure that its value is fully appreciated,
especially by the younger generation particularly. A statutory National Commission for Heritage Sites
will be made fully operational. This will be an important instrument to strengthen the foundations of our
pluralistic culture and inheritances.

• We will continue to pursue an independent, pro-India foreign policy
The Indian National Congress has always upheld India’s supreme national interests and has often braved
criticism and opposition both at home and abroad in defending the country’s interests. At the same time,
the Indian National Congress has always believed that it is India’s historic destiny to be engaged and
connected with the rest of the world and, in particular, with the countries of Asia.
The foreign policy followed in the past five years has yielded handsome results: the foremost example is
the agreements on civil nuclear cooperation signed with the USA, Russia, France and Kazakhstan.

The long-held policy of the Indian National Congress is that the Government of Sri Lanka should find
an honourable solution to the strife in that country and ensure that all communities, especially the Tamilspeaking people, are guaranteed and enjoy equal rights within the framework of a united Sri Lanka. The
Indian National Congress offers to help the parties reach an agreement as envisaged in the India-Sri
Lanka Peace Accord of 1987 which remains the only basis for a politically negotiated settlement.
The Indian National Congress welcomes the return of multi-party democracy to Bangladesh and Nepal.
It will work with both countries to deepen bilateral ties across a wide spectrum of areas for demonstrable
mutual benefit. The Indian National Congress also believes that the two countries must take note of
India’s security concerns in a more meaningful manner.
The Indian National Congress has always championed the legitimate and peaceful aspirations of the longsuffering Palestinian people and urges that a viable Palestinian state be established at the earliest.
India’s relationships with countries like the USA, Russia, China and Japan and with countries of Europe
have been transformed by sustained diplomatic efforts since 2004. These relationships will be further
deepened. India has begun a whole new process of engagement with the countries of Africa where there is
great appreciation of what India has to offer to them. This engagement will be expanded.

• The Indian National Congress will intensify the involvement of overseas Indians in
development
The Indian National Congress takes great pride, as does the entire country, in the outstanding
accomplishments of overseas Indians in different fields. The Indian National Congress also acknowledges
the vital role remittances by overseas Indians play in bolstering the country’s finances. The Ministry
of Overseas Indian Affairs was created in May 2004 to reflect the priority that the Indian National
Congress places on maximizing the contributions of the overseas Indian community to our country’s
economic, scientific and technological progress. A number of measures have been taken to protect the
interests of lakhs of Indian workers in the Middle East. This will continue to be a matter of priority. New
opportunities will be created for overseas Indians to play their rightful role in the renewal of institutions
of higher learning and in starting new ventures and businesses. Four new universities will be established
with 50% of the seats reserved for PIO/NRI students.

India’s well-thought out foreign policy and its patient but forceful diplomacy has obliged Pakistan to
admit that its citizens were responsible for carrying out the dastardly attacks in Mumbai in November
2008. The Indian National Congress has striven for an enduring peace and for close economic relations
with Pakistan. The Indian National Congress has also encouraged extensive people-to-people contacts
between the two countries, particularly amongst the younger generation. But the Mumbai attacks have
cast a long shadow on the on-going dialogue and engagement process. It is now entirely upto Pakistan to
break the impasse by taking credible action against those responsible for the carnage in Mumbai. If it does
so and dismantles the terrorist networks that operate from its soil, a Congress-led government will not be
found wanting in its response.
19

20

V. An Appeal

  NOTES

The Indian National Congress has been central to the public life of our country for almost 125 years.
It embodies the very idea of India like no other party.
Throughout its long history, the priorities, policies and programmes of the Indian National Congress have
been anchored in a vision of an economically prosperous, socially just, politically united and culturally
harmonious India.
Steadfastness to basic principles has never impeded responsiveness to new and emerging challenges.
The people of our country have, time and again, placed their trust and confidence in the Indian National
Congress.
It has been the relentless endeavour of the Indian National Congress to fulfill the expectations of our
people.
Much has been accomplished in the past six decades. But much more remains to be done.
The Indian National Congress comes before the people of India with utmost humility, proud of its
achievements but always conscious of the tasks awaiting us as a nation.
The Indian National Congress appeals to the people of India to vote for it on the strength of its
contributions, its convictions, its concerns and its charter.
Through this manifesto, the Indian National Congress renews its resolve to remain the foremost
instrument of socio-economic transformation based on conviction, commitment, competence and
compassion .
Through this manifesto, the Indian National Congress rededicates itself to the politics of service and the
politics of strengthening the foundations of the modern Indian nation-state.
Through this manifesto, the Indian National Congress pledges to the people of our country its
determination to implement its promises with a single-minded sense of purpose.
Vote for the Idea of India: Vote Indian National Congress
Vote for Unity through Diversity: Vote Indian National Congress
Vote for Economic Growth with Communal Harmony: Vote Indian National Congress
Vote for Economic Growth with Social Justice: Vote Indian National Congress.
Vote for Security, Stability, Continuity and Integrity: Vote Indian National Congress
A Vote for the Congress is a Vote For Your Future and the Future of Your Children.

21

22

  NOTES

23

Janata Dal (Secular)

Janata Dal (Secular) president H D Deve Gowda and vice-president Bapu Kaldate released the party manifesto for the Lok Sabha elections in New Delhi on April 6. The JD(S) manifesto focuses on the rural poor, with Gowda promising to write off all loans of small and marginal farmers borrowed from co-operative and public sector banks from 1991 onwards. The full text of JD(S) manifesto for the Lok Sabha elections 2009 is as follows. 

Our Commitment

We will realise this manifesto by bringing in political pressure, giving thrust to the programmes and policies and fighting for implementation.

Promise made out of experience

Janata Dal (Secular) is a recognised state party of regional character. As National President of this political party, I would like to share some of my thoughts with my people. These thoughts are originated out of my experience of 50 years of long standing political life.

Today national politics is at crossroads. Coalition governments have become order of the day and the people of this nation have accepted this reality. Of course in a democratic country like India such a situation is inevitable.

In a federal system of multi-cultures, the political parties of regional character reflect the true aspirations of the people at large and therefore such political parties play a vital role in national politics.

In an inevitable political situation of this kind, our party which is committed to secularism, social justice, independent foreign policy, pluralism and economic policies and programmes suited for this land, naturally has identified itself with the Third Front, which is an alternative political imperative.

Two big national parties, have already projected their prime ministerial candidates. For these two parties the prime ministerial candidate is more important rather than any constructive policy and programme. A meaningless and irrelevant debate is on about the future prime minister. By projecting their next prime ministerial candidate the national parties think they have solved a great national problem. How ridiculous! I don’t have any interest in such things and I don’t think it is needed. Instead, my utmost concern and interest is which policies and programmes would do well in solving the multiple problems of this country.

I am essentially a villager. I started my political career from the lowest rung of a representative institution in a democratic set up, and rose gradually from step by step in politics. I have experienced and seen the abject poverty of the rural areas. I have been fighting for the betterment of the rural poor. As a legislator, as an opposition leader in the state Assembly, as a chief minister and finally by coincidence as prime minister of this great country, I was always thinking of changing the dismal picture of rural areas. I had the opportunity of serving Karnataka state as its chief minister for 18 months and next as prime minister of India for 10 months. I have the self satisfaction of having taken certain firm decisions, whenever I had the opportunity, and of implementing special programmes to benefit the poor and rural classes.

When I was the chief minister of Karnataka, I introduced the scheme of providing food grains to poor at the lowest price and green cards were issued to the people below the poverty line in my state. After ascertaining myself that this scheme which I introduced as chief minister of Karnataka was a great success in taking care of the hungry poor. United Front Government under my leadership extended this scheme to the entire nation. BPL cards were distributed to 36 crore poor people of this country. This was a unique scheme introduced for the first time by the Central Government after Independence.

But, nobody took a serious note of this laudable achievement. Now the two big political parties which claim as national parties have stepped down from the attic and are at the ground level. Hence now they might have woken up to the reality! One national party promises 25 kg of rice and wheat to the poor at a price of Rs 3 per kg, while the other national party promises 35 kg of rice and wheat at Rs 2 per kg! Thank God, now I am satisfied that at last and at least these big national parties have now realised and accepted the programmes which I launched during my tenure as prime minister to ameliorate the conditions of the hungry poor.

When I was the chief minister of Karnataka, having understood the problems of the farmers and the importance of the irrigation, I gave a special priority for irrigation projects. Encouraged by this, soon after assuming the office of prime minister, United Front Government introduced AIBP (Accelerated Irrigation Benefit programme) which provides Central Government assistance for all the ongoing irrigation projects of the states. The abject poverty and lack of amenities faced by the slum dwellers of the cities, which caught my attention during my Nagarasanchar when I was CM prompted me to take a decision for allocation of funds to the tune of Rs 500 crore in the Central Budget for the development of slum dwellers. It was the first time that such a huge sum of money was earmarked in the Central Budget for the welfare of the slum dwellers.

A national party, in its manifesto, has promised to provide 25 per cent reservation for women in employment sector. The said party may be ignorant of the achievement of Janata Dal in Karnataka. When I was the chief minister, 33 per cent reservation was made compulsory for women in employment sector and moreover 50 per cent reservation in education department. This reservation policy which I implemented is still in force in my state. Not only this I also introduced 33 per cent political reservation for women in the local bodies. I tried hard when I was the prime minister to introduce the Women Reservation Bill to extend the above to Parliament and state Assemblies.

The intention of saying all these facts is to say that programmes and policies that I introduced and formulated while I was CM and PM have the bearing of my experience.

That is why, at this juncture, when there is a debate as to who should be the Prime Minister and who will be the Prime Minister getting an unwanted spicy publicity, I would like to clarify honestly one point. I am interested in the policies and programmes and their implementation and nothing else. If my party were to get an opportunity to have a say in the new secular set up which may come to power at the centre after the election, my condition being the implementation of the programmes spelt out in this manifesto of my party. I also swear, if need be, I will fight ceaselessly for the implementation of them.

Thus by bringing in political pressure, giving thrust to the programmes and policies, and fighting for their implementation in these three ways our party would like to stick to realise the party’s programmes and we pray the people’s support for it.

It is my party’s prayer for the people of this great nation not to be carried away by hollow, artificial glorification of individual centred politics, but extend their whole hearted support for a political system to come to power, which really cares for its policies and programmes rather than an individual.

Background

This is the second parliamentary elections in India in the 21st Century and fourth after the introduction of the much hyped liberalisation and globalization policies which have landed the country in an economic mess.

The earlier NDA government was so much enamoured by these policies that it coined the INDIA SHINING slogan and used it for election propaganda for the 2004 parliamentary elections by spending Rs 200 crore of government money. But it was rejected by the people outright. Now the UPA government has chosen BHARAT NIRMAN as the slogan for election propaganda of the UPA government for the 2009 parliamentary elections by spending Rs.190 crore of government money. This manifesto is placed before the people of India who will decide through their ballots.

It may be recalled that the NDA government which preceded the UPA dispensation, used the globalisation, liberalisation and privatisation economic philosophy to strengthen its urban vote base and used it as a smoke screen to implement its hidden agenda of Hindutva strategy of socio-political transformation of Indian secular society. The worst face of this strategy was implemented in Gujarat in 2002. But by the time the 2004 Parliamentary elections were held the economic and social consequences of the policies of the NDA government became very visible to the common man. Hence the people of India rejected the false propaganda of INDIA SHINING slogan.

The UPA government which succeeded NDA government claims to have introduced many far reaching and pro-poor policies during its five year rule. Of them NREGP is considered as a flagship scheme for providing jobs for the rural poor. But several studies including CAGs report have shown how public money has gone down the drain because of corruption which is widespread in its implementation. UPA government has been claiming that its economic reform policies have resulted in achieving eight to nine per cent annual growth rate of GDP.

But it refuses to concede that even without these reforms, Indian economy experienced about seven per cent rate of growth of GDP during 1980s. The structural economic reforms were introduced by Dr Manmohan Singh from 1991 with a good intention of bailing out the Indian economy which was in trouble. But the reforms also encouraged unscrupulous people to indulge in financial frauds and till now have created 18 SCAMS involving many top ranking political leaders, corporate houses and stock brokers, the latest being the Satyam Scam. But only about four people have been indicted and jailed so far.

The broad based opposition which started with the United Front government in 1996 against introducing capital account convertibility of Indian rupee saved Indian economy from the ravages of Asian currency crisis quite apart from encouraging all the black money accumulated in India to escape from the country. The UPA government went on assuring the people that Indian economy will not be affected by the economic meltdown which started in USA and spread to all other countries.

But now Indian economy is in recession and the much coveted high rate of growth of GDP has become a mirage. Exports have come down and foreign capital which was invested in Indian stocks and shares has fled the country.

As a result of these distressing economic events, large numbers of people both in organised and unorganised sectors of the economy are thrown out of jobs in the country.

Thousands of engineers have lost their jobs due to the impact of unbridled liberalisation and globalization. The two achievements of globalisation, liberalisation and privatisation have been the creation of wide inequalities of income and wealth and increase in the number of people below poverty line to 260 million as estimated by the World Bank.

These distressing economic consequences are slowly impacting the social fabric of the country and strengthening the divisive forces. If the economic distress is not stopped by appropriate policy measures, there will be more violence in the country which may threaten the very existence of democracy in India.

Against this background the Janata Dal (Secular) party would like to present this manifesto of its future policies for the consideration of the people of India in the 2009 Parliamentary elections. The main thrust of the Janata Dal (Secular) party will be to promote development through mixed economy approach and social justice through reducing the wide inequalities created by globalisation, liberalisation and privitisation.

Though the Janata Dal (Secular) party is now a regional party, it is a part and parcel of the broader national Third Front. It may be recalled that the United Front government under the leadership of Shri H D Deve Gowda implemented several pro-people policies, programmes and schemes like issuing 36 crore of BPL cards to the people. The Janata Dal (Secular) party promises through this manifesto that it will endeavour to implement the following policies and programmes by using its persuasive influence within the Third Front.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will strive to implement the following policies and programmes intended to help the poor and the downtrodden including minorities and women by supporting such national alliance and such national leadership which will agree to implement the following policies and programmes.

Rescuing Indian agriculture

Even after 60 years after Independence, agriculture continues to be the main stay of vast majority of the people. Almost 54 per cent of the country’s workforce is dependent on agriculture for their livelihood. The successive governments damaged the structure of Indian agriculture in the name of institutional reforms and the much publicized green revolution has tapered off. Most of the policies adopted to develop agriculture have failed. Productivity has declined. Farmers’ indebtedness has increased. In short, Indian agriculture is back to square one. This is evident from thousands of farmers committing suicide all over the country. The much publicized writing off of farmers’ loans has touched only the tip of the iceberg. Some bold policy measures will have to be implemented in order to save the farmers and to rescue and rejuvenate Indian agriculture.

1) The Janata Dal (Secular) party will write off all past loans of the small and marginal farmers borrowed from the cooperative credit institutions and public sector banks from 1991. The government will repay these loans to the banks in instalments so that the banking institutions will not suffer. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will also create a semi-Judicial Authority to conduct Arbitration Proceedings in the case of disputes relating to the private money lenders.

2) The Janata Dal (Secular) party will give top priority for irrigation to increase the area under irrigation. First priority will be given to completion of the ongoing irrigation projects by doubling the outlay on Accelerated Irrigation Scheme which was introduced in 1996 under the leadership of former prime minister Shri H D Deve Gowda. Repair and maintenance expenditure on irrigation dams and canals has been very low because it has been considered as non-plan expenditure. To rectify this, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will treat the expenditure on repair and maintenance of irrigation dams and canals as plan expenditure which will increase the amount substantially. Agricultural universities will be mandated to adopt neighbourhood regions for integrated development by providing extension services to the farmers.

3) A National Agriculture Price Stabilisation Fund will be created by allocating

Rs 5000 crore to provide price support to food grain crops and fruit and vegetable crops. A national network of Warehouses and Cold Storage units will be created through Public-Private Partnership model to help the farmers who are engaged in growing of horticulture and commercial crops. Agro-processing and packaging units will be encouraged in the private sector by offering 10 years tax holiday for such private sector units.

4) A nation wide pension scheme will be launched to provide Rs 500 monthly pension to all marginal and small farmers and agricultural labourers above the age of 60 years. This will prevent hunger deaths in remote rural areas. The pension will be disbursed through India Post to prevent corruption in delivery mechanism. It will also add to the business of the postal services which is facing decline in its business because of the fast growing private courier services

5) All commercial banks will be mandated by amending the relevant Banking Law to lend at least 20 per cent of their advances to agriculture including horticulture, floriculture and fishy culture at subsidised rate of five per cent and the government will make good the loss to the bank on account of this subsidised interest. Further, these loans to the farmers will be covered by insurance for small and marginal farmers and the premium payable will be shared by the concerned small and marginal farmers and the government.

6) The Janata Dal (Secular) party will also examine the feasibility of introducing Fertiliser Entitlement Cards to the farmers who can purchase subsidised fertilisers in open market. This will save huge leakage which is presently going on in estimation and dispersal of fertiliser subsidy.

7) Indian agriculture has started facing the impact of unfair competition under the dictated terms and conditions of World Trade Organisation and by signing many bilateral Free Trade agreements with SAARC countries, and the proposed agreements with ASEAN and BRIC countries. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will appoint an expert committee to inquire into the impact of these agreements on Indian agriculture and will take a decision whether to continue or terminate those agreements to protect the Indian farmers.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will also give notice to the WTO for exclusion of agriculture from WTO arrangement. The developed countries promised to allow free movement of professional people across the boundaries of countries. But suddenly they have started telling that it involves immigration question and hence are not ready to implement that provision. Since Indian agriculture involves food security of the people of India, India will give notice to WTO informing that India will withdraw agriculture related issues from any future negotiations under WTO.

New deal for rural India

Rural India is a partially deserted place today thanks to the misconceived policies of the successive governments. Though sporadic attempts were made to improve the living conditions of the rural masses, because of the unreliability of income from agriculture and failure to create non-farm employment opportunities in rural areas, rural youth have deserted the villages and have moved to unorganised urban India where they are engaged in low paid odd jobs to keep themselves afloat. This new development has added to the already overburdened urban society and economy.

1) Rural India requires our immediate attention. Apart from giving top priority to the rural infrastructure development like rural roads, rural housing, rural education, rural health and rural electrification, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will treat repair and maintenance of rural roads, rural school buildings, and buildings of primary health centers as plan expenditure. This will increase the amount available for repairs and maintenance of rural infrastructures. Such treatment will enable the elected rural local bodies to receive more funds from the Central and state governments to improve the conditions of rural infrastructure.

2) The Janatha Dal (Secular) party will make it mandatory for the commercial banks to provide refinance for the Rural Sthreesakthi Groups which operate microfinance units to help the rural women. Further, commercial banks and cooperative banks will be mandated to lend loans to weavers, and rural artisans at five per cent rate of interest and the government will provide interest subsidy to the banks.

National housing policy for the rural people

The successive governments both at the centre and states have been implementing housing schemes like Indira Awas Yojana for the poor people. But the actual achievement has been far from satisfactory mainly because these schemes have been implemented only as government welfare schemes. There are also reports of large scale corruption in their implementation.

Therefore, it is necessary to involve the private sector builders for providing housing for the rural poor and the middle class if we want to cover them within specified period of time. Private builders have been encouraged to build houses for the urban middle class and the rich in cities by offering income tax rebate, stamp duty concession and also lower interest on their borrowings from the financial institutions. Now it is necessary to encourage them to go to rural areas and build houses for the rural poor and middle class by offering subsidised interest rates on their borrowings from public sector banks, income tax rebate and stamp duty exemption for registering the houses in rural areas.

1) The Janata Dal (Secular) party will formulate such a national rural housing policy for the poor by roping in the private sector builders to provide environmentally safe houses for the rural poor and the middle class.

2) As far as the existing government scheme of providing loan assistance to the rural poor is concerned, the loans sanctioned to the rural poor for housing purpose will be written off. The subsidy for the houses under the government sponsored housing scheme for the rural poor will be increased.

3) Enumeration of shelter-less people will be done throughout the country and in a span of five years, it is our commitment, everyone gets a shady shelter.

Assistance for educated youth for self-employment

Millions of educated youth are unemployed for various reasons in the country. We cannot create jobs for all of them both in the public and private sectors. We cannot also leave them to fend for themselves as it may create socio-political tensions.

1) Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will ask all the banks to lend loans to unemployed educated youths to start their own self-employment activities such as poultry, fishery, dairy, commercial animal husbandry, horticulture, floriculture etc in rural areas, and computer service centres, internet services, language and computer training centres and a host of modern services which are in demand in urban areas. The government will stand guarantee for loans up to Rs. 5 lakh. Appropriate procedures will be formulated to make them repay the loans through instalments. This scheme will encourage enterprising, educated youth to develop self-confidence in generating income for themselves. The government will also help them in marketing their products by organizing appropriate marketing facilities. The greatest gift a government can give its citizens is an opportunity that will enable them to survive, to grow, and to thrive. Such gift may be good education, or a job or a loan to start a business.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will help the unemployed educated youth to get bank loans to start their own businesses.

Comprehensive health insurance for the poor

After food, health is the second most important item of expenditure which bothers poor people both in urban and rural areas. Some attempts have been made to provide assistance to the poor people by way of reimbursing the expenditure on treatment for some specified diseases. These have not really helped the poor.

1) So the Janata Dal (Secular) party will introduce a Comprehensive Health Card for the BPL families who will be made entitled to receive treatment including investigation, hospitalization and medicines for all diseases and in all appropriate hospitals in the country. The expenditure on such treatments will be reimbursed to the concerned hospitals by the government.

Alternative approach to corporate zamindari (SEZ)

Both Congress and NDA governments copied and implemented Special Economic Zones approach to industrial development by enabling the private corporate entities to acquire vast tracts of fertile agricultural land for developing modern infrastructure to encourage private industries. This approach has not only created unprecedented resistance from the farmers but also has given rise to a new system of private corporate zamindari in India. The congress government led by Jawaharlal Nehru abolished zamindari system of land ownership. Later Smt. Indira Gandhi imposed ceiling on land holdings. Now under the NDA and UPA governments the land is taken away from farmers and given to private corporate entities to own huge tracts of land in the name of industrial development. This is a regressive form of development which should be carefully evaluated before it causes undesirable socioeconomic consequences.

1) The Janata Dal (Secular) party will not allow SEZs to become new form of private corporate zamindari system in disguise. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will appoint an expert committee to examine the SEZs as a strategy of industrial development in the country and to recommend required modifications in this strategy to prevent its negative socioeconomic consequences in the country.

Conditional direct income transfer in place of PDS

In 1996 the United Front government led by Shri H D Deve Gowda issued 36 crore of BPL cards under which subsidised food grains were supplied to the poor people all over the country. The national political parties did not bother then to recognize its importance as a food security measure for the poor in the country. But now these very parties are competing to supply subsidized food grains to the poor at unbelievable price. What is more surprising is that they have failed to take note of the deficiencies of the PDS in the country.

Justice Wadhawa Committee appointed by the Supreme Court in 2006 has found that there is a nexus between fair price shop owners, transporters and officials of the Civil Supplies department which has made PDS inefficient and corrupt. Without realising this ground reality, both the national parties have made promises to waste public money on highly subsidised PDS.

1) Therefore, the Janatha Dal (Secular) party will introduce conditional direct cash income transfer scheme to the rural landless and urban BPL families on the lines of Brazil, Mexico and Chile. Specified amount of monthly income will be transferred to the women members of the BPL families with the condition that they should get their children immunised and send them to school. This new scheme will enable them to purchase whatever food articles they want. This will also prevent leakages in the distribution of food grains at subsidized price to the BPL families. It will also cover their children under universal immunization programme and will ensure school attendance instead of encouraging child labour.

Expansion of public sector

The structural economic reforms were aimed against the public sector in India. In the name of liberalization and globalization, the NDA and the UPA governments sold the equity of the public sector units. UPA government has increased the equity share of private sector in insurance and air transport sectors. UPA government even contemplated to sell the government share of equity in public sector banks. Such policy was pursued in the name of liberalization and privatization. But the wheel has come full circle in the sense that America and Europe which hoisted liberalization and globalization on the developing countries have started nationalizing banks and other financial institutions for saving them from collapse.

Nationalisation has come to be willy-nilly accepted in countries where private sector was worshipped as God incarnation. But in India UPA government is still pushing forward denationalization programme. This should be stopped.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will review all the past privatization efforts and will reverse if found necessary to strengthen the public sector in the country.

The liberalization and privatization in the cement industry has led to creation of cement cartel and arbitrary fixing of cement prices disregarding the interests of the cement consumers. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will create a public sector National Cement Corporation of India which will be entrusted with production of cement and acquisition of cement producing units abroad to break the private sector cement cartel. It will be parallel to SAIL which has broken the steel cartel in India. Since steel and cement are very important requirements of all infrastructure activity, creation of public sector cement producing organization is necessary.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will also create an India Soverign Fund by diverting a part of the foreign exchange reserves to invest in and acquire cement producing units abroad and coal and oil fields in foreign countries. This will act as stabilisation mechanism for the domestic prices of cement and petroleum products.

Regulating corporate governance

Starting from 1991 till today economic liberalization policies of the Congress governments have resulted in 18 SCAMS. The latest Satyam Scam has exposed the weaknesses embedded in private corporate governance.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend the company law to make any corporate fraud a criminal offence punishable by long term imprisonment. It will make it mandatory to appoint one-third of the directors on the corporate boards as independent directors and the SEBI will be empowered to make the selection of such independent directors for the listed companies and the Company Law Board will select and appoint independent director for unlisted companies. The earlier practice of getting the approval of the remuneration of the corporate CEO.s was dispensed with after the liberalization programme.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will put a ceiling on the nature and quantum of total remuneration of the corporate CEOs on the lines introduced in USA.

Financial sector regulation

1 The Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend the Reserve Bank of India Act to change the selection and appointment of the Governor of the RBI. It will be reserved only for the experienced professional bankers and professional monetary economists. The practice of appointing the retired IAS officers as Governors of RBI will be discontinued.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend the RBI Act to make it mandatory for the RBI not only to maintain price stability by using appropriate monetary policies but also to ensure the mandated flow of bank funds to the agriculture sector and small scale industries in the country. The present practice of allowing the unwilling banks instead to invest in NABARD bonds will be discontinued.

RBI will be held responsible for the shortfall in the mandated flow of bank credit to priority sectors. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will make it mandatory for the RBI to use the accumulated foreign exchange reserves in the best interest of the country and not to benefit only the corporate sector.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend the SEBI Act to empower SEBI to impose severe penalties on brokers and brokerage companies for any violation of trading rules in the BSE and NSE. The Janata Dal(Secular)party will mandate the SEBI to monitor the functioning of credit rating agencies which indulge in taking commission from the companies and prepare favaourable ratings, which is a clear case of conflict of interest. Similarly, Satyam Scam has exposed the auditors and audit firms for concealing the true financial position of Satyam Company. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will make it mandatory for the SEBI to approve the auditors for listed companies and Company Law Board to approve auditors for unlisted companies. Only those auditors will be made eligible to audit corporate accounts. The so called autonomy hitherto enjoyed by the Chartered Accountants Institutes will be dispensed with.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will abolish the present practice of allowing unidentified foreign entities to trade in BSE and NSE by using participatory notes. Further, the Janata Dal-Secular party will levy capital gains tax at the normal rates of income tax applicable to income slabs if the capital gains are realized within three years from the date of purchasing the shares.

The present low rate of 15 per cent on capital gains will be made applicable to only those who realize the capital gains after three years. Furthermore, the practice of allowing short selling will be periodically reviewed by the SEBI and the practice of derivative trading will also be periodically reviewed by the SEBI. Over-the-counter derivatives will be banned.

These measures are intended to keep out the speculators and encourage genuine investors to invest in share market. They will also prevent future financial SCAMS. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will review the FDI limits prescribed by the UPA government and if found necessary in the national interest re-fix the limits.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will not allow free capital account convertibility of Indian rupee.

Expansion and improvement of higher education.

While considerable efforts have been made by both the central and state governments to expand and improve the primary education particularly in rural areas, enough attention has not been paid to the expansion and improvement of higher education. The total outlay on education which was supposed to reach 6 per cent of GDP is still hovering around 3 per cent. Expansion and improvement of higher education has become necessary in the wake of globalization which has created unprecedented demand for good quality educated manpower. Realiasing this demand even those countries in Asia and Africa which are less developed than India are expanding their higher education. The gross enrolment rate in higher education in India is still 10 per cent which is far below the rate of 20 per cent required to be classified as developed in higher education. The UPA government's announcement of 30 more universities, 12 IITs and IIMs has remained on paper.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will open one national university in all those states which do not have a national university. It will open one IIT and one IIM in those states where there is no IIT and IIM. It will also open one AIIMS in a southern state and two in the western Indian states. This will expand the higher education substantially.

Further, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will declare Jamia Millia Islamia as a minority University with 50 per cent seats reserved for students belonging to Muslim minority community.

Though we have 378 universities in India, only 140 are accredited by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council. This would imply that we have to improve academic facilities to improve the quality of higher education to meet the growing demand for highly educated and trained manpower.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will increase the outlay on education from 3 per cent to at least 4 per cent in the first year and to 5 per cent thereafter most of which will be spent on the improvement of the quality of higher education in the country.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will increase the number of foreign scholarships for merited SC/ST and OBC students. Bank loans for SC/ST and OBC students to pursue higher education will be guaranteed by the government so that the banks will be induced to lend student loans without the fear of accumulating NPA.

EMPOWERING WOMEN AND YOUTH. Women and youth deserve special attention in the fast changing society where discrimination and violence are increasing. Realising this social reality, the United Front government under the leadership of Shri H.D.Deve Gowda had introduced the Women.s Reservation Bill in the Parliament which could not become law.

Now the Janata Dal (Secular) party will make another effort to enact women's reservation Bill which has been languishing for several years. This will be a land mark achievement of the Janata Dal (Secular) party.

The attempts to .Talibanise. Indian culture will be firmly dealt with by the Janata Dal (Secular) party which will make all efforts to ban Bjarang Dal and Sri Rama Sene organizations.

Youth will be encouraged to go for self employment by providing them bank loans at subsidized rate of interest as it has been outlined above. In addition to such financial assistance to the educated youth, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will encourage enterprising educated youth to start their own enterprises by providing investment funds through a government owned Venture Capital Fund which will be created.

Reformulation of reservation policy & implemention of koppal resolution

Reservation policy is an important cornerstone of our Constitution intended to help the socially and educationally disadvantaged groups of people. But over the years it has benefited only some dominant sections of the disadvantaged groups. Realising this, the Janata Dal(Secular) party government in Karnataka reformulated the reservation policy by categorising different disadvantaged groups so as to help the lagging groups. This policy has been hailed by the courts.

So the Janata Dal (Secular) party convention held recently in Koppal, in Karnataka, passed a resolution to make internal reservation more equitable. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will implement this policy all over the country.

Janata Dal (Secular) party is committed to implement the formula for reservation

in Education and Employment for backward classes, women and Muslims which was in force when Sri.Devegowda was the Chief Minister of Karnataka, and which is also currently in force, in the entire country and shall be given effect in all the states by bringing necessary amendment to the constitution.

Wage-subsidy for employing obcs, SCs and STs and children of bpl families in private sector

In the wake of structural reforms introduced in India from 1991, expansion of the public sector has slowed down whereas the private sector has expanded by leaps and bounds. But the employment opportunities which have been created have gone only to the candidates from urban background. Rural candidates have not benefited much. What is disturbing is that in the name of facing international competition, socially backward groups have been denied their rightful share of whatever employment opportunities that were created. The UPA government tried to persuade the private sector to make reservation voluntarily for the OBCs, SCs and STs. But there was no positive response.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will introduce a scheme of wage-subsidy to encourage the private sector to employ OBCs, SCs, STs and qualified children of BPL families. The wage-subsidy will be proportionate to the wage bill of the enterprise which employs BC,SC, ST and other specified candidates and will be adjusted against tax payable by the enterprise. This will be a novel positive approach to induce the private sector to create jobs for qualified OBC, SC, ST and other specified candidates.

Constitutional amendment for rural reservation

The rural people have been denied, among other things, proper education facilities and as a result they are unable to compete with better educated urban people in employment opportunities. Recognising their disabilities inflicted upon the rural people by the past policies of the successive governments, the Janata Dal party government in Karnataka extended the reservations in admissions in education institutions and in government employment. But this policy was quashed by the courts as violation of the fundamental right of the citizens.

So the Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend Articles 14, 15 (4) and 16 ( 4) to extend reservations for those who study in village schools.

Social security for the unorganised sector workers

Though the UPA government appointed a committee to recommend social security measures for workers employed in unorganized sector of the Indian economy, it has not acted upon the recommendations mainly because of the Intra-Congress party rivalries. This is unfortunate. Unorganised sector contributes about 40 per cent of the GDP of the country. Crores of workers are employed who do not have security of jobs, pension benefit and even medical benefit. They are exploited to the core.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will examine the feasibility of social security measures recommended by the expert committee and will implement the necessary social security measures for the workers of the unorganized sector in a phased manner.

Job and social security for taxi and auto- drivers

Taxi and auto-riksha drivers in towns and cities, truck drivers engaged in transporting goods and drivers of private passenger vehicles do not have security of jobs and social security benefits.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will enact a legislation making it legally compulsory to provide security of jobs, medical benefits and pension benefits to these drivers. This legislation will also cover conductors, cleaners and other manual workers like hamalies employed in these transport activities.

Pension scheme for the senior citizen artists

Thousands of artists including those who have served in theatre, cinema, painting,, music, dance etc, are facing financial problems during their old age. It is our duty to recognise their past services and make their old age a pleasant one.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will introduce a pension scheme for such artists above the age of 60 years . They will be paid Rs.1000 per month till their death. This will go a long away in helping them to live a dignified life during their old age.

National agency for management of natural calamities

Because of the geographical vastness and climatic diversity, India has been regularly facing innumerable natural calamities like droughts, severe floods, earth quakes, Tsunami etc. Whenever such natural calamities occur, the state and central governments provide relief belatedly. But the process of providing relief is cumbersome and often delayed for procedural reasons.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will create a statutory National Natural Calamity Agency for managing all types of natural calamities as an apex body to assess the damage and provide all types of required relief to the people and areas affected by natural calamities.

The National Natural Calamity Agency will have state level branches which will be standing organizations. The funds recommended by the successive Finance Commissions for helping the state governments for providing relief will be transferred to the National Natural Calamity Agency for management and all donations, both domestic and foreign, received will also be transferred to the National Natural Calamity Agency which will allocate funds to different states depending upon the need. The National Agency will be headed by a senior administrator and will include experts in geology, climatology, distress management and reputed NGOs as members. It will be a standing Agency which acts suo moto as soon as the natural calamity occurs in any part of the country. It will be empowered to requisition help from state/ district level administration, army, navy and air force and also from the central government wherever necessary. Funds credited to the account of National Natural Calamity Agency will be deposited in public sector banks and will be utilized by the National Agency as and when required for providing immediate relief. Setting up of such an organization will eliminate the colonial practice of some central government officers coming to the states for on the spot inspection and then recommending paltry sums for relief works after a lapse of time.

Reformulation of foreign policy

The UPA government has done damage to the reputation of India as a non-aligned country, which can be trusted by the world community, by signing the nuclear energy agreement with the USA. This is only an excuse as the UPA government has pushed the country into the American political matrix in South­ East Asia. While the elites of this country are enamoured by this achievement if we can call it an achievement, the country.s independence in formulating and articulating its own independent foreign policy has been compromised to the dynamics of the American political and military strategies. Therefore, it is necessary to resurrect India.s independence in formulating its own foreign policy.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will announce its pragmatic Non-Alignment Policy of promoting friendship and cooperation with all countries of the world without fear or favour to any country or power-blocks like NATO and CSTO( Collective Security Treaty Organisation). The Non-Alignment policy will be pragmatic in that it will be guided by the national interest and not to support or oppose any country.s political and military ambitions. India will actively engage itself in promoting peace and stability in all parts of the world. It will not brook any partisan policies of other countries based on region or religion.

India will not hesitate to retaliate any such partisan foreign policies of other countries if they affect the honour and reputation of India.

It will actively participate in the UNO sponsored activities and its agencies on equal terms. It will cooperate with all countries in tackling domestic as well as international terrorism. In return India will expect UN agencies to be impartial in their dealings with India.

Comprehensive defence policy

A country of India.s size and diversity, and surrounded by politically unstable countries, some of whom deliberately sponsor terrorism as has been amply proved by Mumbai attack, has got to necessarily devote more resources and attention to its defence preparedness. But the recent report of CAG on the numerical size and quality of India's military hardware has unnerved even the peace loving citizens of this country. The UPA government has miserably failed to modernize and strengthen our armed forces.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will give top priority to modernize and strengthen our defence preparedness. As a first step, our party will build a minimum nuclear deterrent force as a safeguard against any unexpected eventualities.

Corresponding to the development of minimum nuclear deterrence force, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will encourage the development of weapons delivery system like nuclear weapon carrier missiles.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will encourage the building of ICBMs. India has come to be surrounded by countries with space weapons capability.

Therefore, the Janata Dal (Secular) party will create a new division within ISRO to develop space weapons system for use as quickly as possible.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will create Airborne Brigade, Assault Landing Brigade and a Helicopter Gunship Brigade by acquiring more fighter aircrafts, helicopters and aircraft carriers. It will create four units of Rapid-Assault Force to be stationed in four corners of the country for dealing with any terrorist attack.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will create a new section of defence procurement within each of the embassies in major countries with the responsibility of collecting information about new defence hardware and software ready for use and sale and acquiring them after the approval by the appropriate authority. Though there is a military attaché in each of our embassies, they simply do defence surveillance work. Hence, we will assign them clearly defined specific tasks to help the country to modernize its defence equipments by constantly watching the developments in defence related science and technology and feeding the information to the defence ministry which will help in their decision making.

Protection of minorities and adivasis

Political parties have used the minorities in this country as their vote banks and as a result have received backlash. Minorities do not trust the political parties particularly after the enactment of POTA to curb terrorism.

Because of the propaganda of the BJP, terrorism has come to be wrongly identified with minority community. What is more the BJP has been demanding reenactment of POTA to curb the terrorism in the country.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party is totally opposed to the reenactment of POTA and will oppose victimization of minority community by any political party in the name of curbing terrorism. The Janata Dal (Secular ) party will make efforts to publish Justice Ranganath Mishra Commission Report and to implement its recommendations.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will encourage the minority communities to actively participate in the development of this country and to dissuade those members who are misled to take to terrorism to come back to the main stream of the society.

Active participation in saving the world environment

As an active member and participant of the UNO and its agencies, India will have to cooperate with any effort made by the UNO to contain the socioeconomic consequences of Climate Change. In the past the Indian governments did not support the decisions of the UNO conference held in Kyoto on future course of action for reducing the impact of Climate Change.

The Janata Dal ( Secular) party will support UNO efforts to reduce further deterioration of the world environment as a result of Climate Change.

Mobilising resources for the benefit of the poor

Structural economic reforms particularly liberalization and privatization have created wide inequalities of income and wealth in the country. Apart from this consequence of economic reforms, the fiscal system of the country has been tampered with too much for the benefit of a small section of the society. Consequently, the revenue and fiscal deficits have gone out of control. Public debt has increased enormously. All these fiscal mistakes will have to be corrected.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will appoint an expert committee to review all tax exemptions, deductions, concessions. And to recommend those which can be dispensed with.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will make special efforts to set right the fiscal system of the country by reviewing the entire tax structure of the country in such a way as to raise more tax revenue and to reduce both revenue and fiscal deficits.

The Janata Dal (Secular ) party will restore the fiscal health of the country for the benefit of all sections of the society.

Electoral reforms for saving democracy

Recent controversy relating to the Election Commissioners has exposed the weaknesses of the Constitutional provisions relating to the appointment and removal of Election Commissioners.

The Janata Dal (Secular) party will amend the Constitution to clarify the ambiguities in the appointment and removal of election commissioners and also to ensure their independence form political executive.

The BJP government in Karnataka has made a mockery of democracy by resorting to undemocratic practice of attracting elected MLAs from other parties into its fold by offering them ministerial posts by asking them to resign from their parties and getting them reelected after joining the BJP. The existing disqualifications specified in the Constitutional provision and in the Representation of Peoples Act are not adequate to deal with such novel methods adopted by the BJP in Karnataka. Such practices will be stopped by the Janata Dal (Secular) party by amending the Constitution/ Representation of Peoples Act to ban such persons from contesting any elections for five years. They will also be barred from holding public office for five years.

Reviving harmoneous federalism in India

The Congress government over the years has changed the basic structure of the Indian Constitution by amending it for almost one hundred times and by transferring the powers of the State governments from the State List to the Union List and Concurrent List. This has weakened the state governments.

The Janata Dal ( Secular) party will appoint a High Powered Commission under the chairmanship of a retired Chief Justice of India to review all these constitutional amendments and to recommend wherever necessary to reverse and restore the powers of the state governments back to the State List. This will restore the true spirit of the thinking of the framers of the Indian Constitution. It will also reassure the states that their autonomy guaranteed under the original provisions of the Constitution is restored to its original position. This is necessary for the harmonious relations between the Union and the states.

There has been a demand for creation of smaller states by splitting the geographically bigger states to promote faster pace of socio-economic development. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will appoint the Second States Reorganization Commission to examine the need and desirability of creating smaller states for increasing the pace of development of some backward regions.

Thus the Janata Dal (Secular) party has identified the problems faced by the masses of the country. It has formulated the foregoing policies and programmes to give a helping hand to the socially and economically disadvantaged people. The Janata Dal (Secular) party will strive to fulfill the foregoing policy promises.

As regards policies and programmes we stand distinctly different from two National Parties. The promises made in this manifesto are neither cheap gimmicks nor populistic exercise. These are implementable in letter and spirit.
All BPL families to get 35 kg of rice or wheat every month at Rs 2 per kg. This will be available against Food
Coupons redeemable both at PDS and private outlets.
Ensure farm loans at a maximum interest rate of 4 percent.
Waive agricultural loans.
Introduce a Farm Income Insurance Scheme through which both price and produce will be insured
Irrigate 35 million hectares of additional farmland within 5 years.
Initiate special schemes for the urban poor, such as loans at 4 percent interest to poor vendors.
Set up a “Workers Bank” to provide a safety net for unorganized sector workers.
Revise minimum wages and ensure strict implementation of the Wages Act.


Generate employment through massive public spending on infrastructure projects. Complete the implementation
of Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee’s dream projects: National Highway Development Project by building 15-20 km
of new highways every day; and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, to link all villages with over 500 people
by all-weather road.
2. Introduce schemes to encourage private industry and services sectors. Ensure a low tax, low interest rate
regime.
3. Exempt personal Income Tax for those earning up to Rs 3 lakh per annum. For women and Senior Citizens, the
exemption will be Rs 3.5 lakh per annum. This will benefit over 3.5 crore people.
4. Complete exemption for interest income on bank deposits for all other than corporates and those who have
business income.
5. Scrap Fringe Benefit Tax (FBT), which is a source of harassment to employees and employers alike.
6. Abolish CST and fix a ceiling of 12-14 percent on GST.
7. Ensure watertight monitoring of regulatory bodies so that the public is secured from companies indulging in
fraudulent practices in the stock markets.
8. Construct 10,00,000 housing for the poor units every year; kick-start the real estate sector that is suffering at
present. Bring down interest on housing loans to make urban housing affordable.
9. Take firm steps to identify and retrieve Indian money stashed away in foreign banks. Estimated at Rs. 25 lakh
crore-Rs. 75 lakh crore, getting this amount back through international cooperation will be enough to complete
road and power connectivity throughout the country; ensure setting up of quality schools in all villages. This
quantum of black money, if recovered, will amount to allocating Rs 4 crore to every Indian village to improve
living conditions in the countryside.
10. Boost tourism sector: Identify 50 destinations and develop infrastructure, connectivity. Double foreign tourist
arrivals in 5 years to help generate employment in hospitality industry.
11. Ban on foreign direct investment (FDI) in retail sector to help domestic retail trade.

WAR AGAINST ENEMIES WITHIN AND WITHOUT
1.

BJP’s robust commitment to securing the nation against its enemies is well known. Our first priority will be to
take stern steps against terrorists, cross-border or home-grown. An improved POTA-type law will be
introduced. The intelligence mechanism shall be overhauled. India’s 4000-km long coastline will be fully
protected by enhanced naval security.


We will systematically detect, detain and deport illegal immigrants who have emerged as a major source of
homegrown terror. Fencing of the India-Bangladesh border, deliberately neglected by the UPA in pursuit of
vote bank politics, will be speedily completed.
Use coercive diplomacy to isolate and compel countries engaging in exporting terror across the border to stop
their misadventure. Ensure that the foreign tap of separatist groups in India is completely turned off.
Wage a relentless war against Maoist groups throughout the country using the highly successful and popular
Chhattisgarh model.
Introduce a comprehensive National Identity Card for all citizens of India.

JAI JAWAN IN ACTION
1.
2.
3.
4.

All members of the armed forces and the para-military shall be exempted from payment of Income Tax. This
will benefit nearly 20 lakh people.
Take steps to set up a separate Pay Commission for the armed forces. Also revisit the existing pay structure to
ensure a better deal.
Implement one-rank-one-pension.
Push State Governments to introduce better schemes for the rehabilitation of ex-servicemen and explore
avenues for resettling them with gainful employment.

ENERGY SAVED, ENERGY GAINED:
1.
2.
3.

Generate an additional 120,000 MW of electricity in 5 years through speedy conclusion of ongoing projects
while sanctioning new power plants. 20% of this will be through harnessing non-conventional energy sources.
Reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels by promoting renewable energy options such as run-on-river
electricity projects, solar, wind power and biomass.
Secure energy needs through aggressive diplomatic and commercial moves in oil-producing countries.

WOMEN EMPOWERED, NATION STRENGTHENED
1.

2.

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Introduce the Madhya Pradesh BJP Government’s highly successful ‘Ladli Lakshmi’ Scheme throughout India
to directly transfer funds to the school going girl child to encourage education and secure economic selfsufficiency for young women. Rs. 1.18 lakh after completion of 12th standard.
Pave the way for nationwide implementation of the Bhamashah Scheme proposed by the erstwhile BJP
Government in Rajasthan to directly pay Rs 1,500 to open a bank account for every adult woman, to be
accessed by biometric cards usable through fingerprint.
Provide bicycles to every school going girl child from BPL families throughout India.
Introduce special schemes to promote entrepreneurship among rural women through Self-help Groups (SHGs).
BJP remains committed to bring about 33 percent reservation for women in legislatures and will endeavour to
introduce it at the earliest.
Salaries of 28 lakh Anganwadi workers and helpers, who are the backbone of the Integrated Child Development
Scheme (ICDS) will be doubled.
BJP believes all sections of Indian women cannot be fully empowered without the enactment of a Uniform Civil
Code as decreed in the Directive Principles of the Constitution and emphasized repeatedly by the Supreme
Court. The party remains committed to implementing such a code after discussions with all sections of opinion.

YOUNG INDIA, NATION’S PILLAR
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.

UPA has nurtured despair, frustration and joblessness among India’s young people who account for 50 percent
of the population. BJP will regenerate hope through massive vocational training programmes and job creation
schemes both in rural and urban areas.
A network of National Knowledge Incubation Centres will be set up throughout the country to identify and
groom young talent for every sector of the economy.
Study loans will be made cheaper and more accessible by fixing student loan interest at 4%.
BJP will create 12 million IT-enabled jobs in rural areas. Computer prices will be drastically cut to make it
affordable to every section. All educational institutions will have internet facilities within 5 years. Broadband
connectivity to every village.
Special provisions will be made for SC/ST/OBC and other underprivileged sections of the youth for skill
development with focus on web-based training.

2

6.

Launch an aggressive project to groom young sporting talent by allocating Rs 5,000 crore for creation of sports
infrastructure especially in educational institutions Appoint trained coaches; secure employment for
international medal winners. Sport will be a compulsory subject in school curricula.

NATION’S WEALTH, PEOPLE’S HEALTH
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

BJP is committed to making the right to clean water a fundamental right. A massive programme will be
launched to provide clean, drinking water to every citizen.
A regulatory authority to be set up for private hospitals and nursing homes to monitor unfair practices.
A comprehensive project to bring health-for-all by 2014.
Introduce a mandatory ‘Dial 108 for ambulance at your doorstep’ scheme throughout the country.
Revive the creation of new AIIMS, originally initiated by the NDA Government but neglected by UPA. All six
state-of-the-art hospitals will be rapidly constructed over the next 5 years.
Janani Suraksha Yojana to care for delivering mothers and infants will be strengthened.
Investment will be made to promote alternative medicine such as Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani etc.
Population stabilization holds the key to India’s prosperity. BJP will introduce schemes in consultation with
different sections to expedite serious progress in this direction.

PRIVILEGING THE UNDERPRIVILEGED:
1.

2.

BJP is deeply committed to creating a society of equal opportunities with Justice for All as its credo. Its State
Governments have introduced a series of schemes for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Minorities –
especially in education, job training, poverty alleviation and promotion of entrepreneurial talent. These schemes
will be improved upon and the most successful among them replicated nationally. In addition, people living in
backward regions, particularly in the North-East, inaccessible forests and hilly areas will be prioritized.
Education and Job quota will be introduced for economically backward sections of society other than SCs, STs
and OBCs, for whom reservations will continue.

SENIOR CITIZENS:
1.
2.

Recognising the importance of Senior Citizens in nation-building and inculcating civilisational values, BJP
commits itself to reducing the age for receiving travel benefits from 65 to 60 years.
Complete tax exemption to senior citizens in respect of pension income.

CREATING THE RIGHT ENVIRONMENT:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Combating climate change and global warming through non-polluting technologies will be prioritized.
Importance given to programmes to arrest the melting of Himalayan glaciers from which most major rivers in
North India originate.
Protect and promote forests and afforestation.
Take all appropriate steps to save Tiger, the National Animal, and safeguard critical habitants of all wildlife.
Emphasis to be laid on protecting India’s resplendent but endangered bio-diversity.

DEFENDING THE CIVILISATION
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

The BJP remains committed to the construction of a grand Ram Mandir at Ayodhya.
BJP will not allow anybody to touch the revered Ram Setu. We will evolve a new route for Sethu Samudram
bypassing Ram Setu.
Cleaning the revered Ganga and other major rivers will be a priority. Local communities will be enrolled in this
gigantic task.
Cow protection is an article of faith with BJP. This will be pursued relentlessly.
Full integration of the nation is not possible as long as Article 370 stays on the statute books. BJP remains
steadfast in its belief that the provision must be removed to ensure Indian unity.

3


Nationalist Congress Party

The Nationalist Congress Party chief Sharad Pawar released the party manifesto for General Elections 2009 on April 3. As per the manifesto, NCP stands for a democratic secular society married to equality and social justice as well committed to preserve the unity and integrity of our country. The full text of NCP's manifesto is as follows.

Nationalist Congress Party, which came into existence only ten years ago, has within this short span of time become a significant party in India. This party was whole-heartedly welcomed by the people from the very inception in June 1999. The people gave such a massive support to the party in the parliamentary elections that was held in 1999, just three months after the formation of the party that the Election Commission of India after assessing the performance of the party in the elections, which the party fought all alone, conferred the “National Recognized Party” status to the party which was the only instance in the history of the country of any party obtaining the national status within such a short period after its formation.

Now, NCP has strong functioning units in almost all the states and union territories of the country. The party is in government in three states, Maharashtra, Nagaland and Goa. We have our representatives in ten more states; Kerala, Gujarat, Haryana, Bihar, Orissa, Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Assam.

NCP will be ten years old by 10th June 2009. We are thankful to the people for the support they have given us. We are proud of the party’s growth in these years. By the time we celebrate our next birthday, after the elections, NCP will emerge as a leading party in our country capable of playing a decisive role in shaping the future of the country.

What NCP stands for

NCP stands for a democratic secular society wedded to equality and social justice as well committed to preserve the unity and integrity of our country.

We look up at democracy as a holistic outcome of secularism in practice, ensuring equal rights, politically, economically and socially to each and everyone in the country.

Secularism to us means fraternity amongst followers of different faiths, respecting each others’ faith and cooperation and coexistence among them without any prejudice.

By equity and social justice we mean to ensure equal opportunity for all in all spheres of life, especially for education and skill development with special affirmative action for the deprived sections of the society.

NCP would ensure the unity and integrity of India by strengthening our federal set up through decentralized functioning of the government and the rule of law without any prejudice to any religion, caste, creed, community, region, sex or status.

NCP’s slogan in the election is good governance and a stable government, development oriented, transparent and corruption-free.

NCP’s concept of development

By development, we mean overall development of the life of the common man including the weaker sections of the society in as much as it provides a better life for them, better housing facilities, better food, better clothing, facilities for giving better education for their children, and better health facilities. All these depend on more earnings or remuneration. So the economic development should provide for more employment opportunities and more employment generation schemes and projects.

NCP’s role in the formation of the United Progressive Alliance in Parliament Elections 2004

After the election, the UPA was called upon to form the government. The government was formed on the basis of a common minimum programme (CMP) approved by the UPA partners as well as the Left parties, who also came forward to support the government. Most of the proposals of NCP have been incorporated in the CMP.

Achievements of UPA government

During the UPA regime, India has recorded tangible growth in our economy and India is one of the fast developing countries in the world.

The growth of agriculture sector has not only bestowed us with complete food security, but also enabled us to export food grains to foreign countries.

The implementation of the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme has been a great relief to the starving millions of this country.

The Right to Information Act enacted by the UPA is an effective weapon for fighting corruption.

The implementation of the Sachar Committee recommendations, which provide for proper educational facilities and scholarships and other assistance is a great step to bring the neglected minorities especially Muslims, to the National mainstream of the country.

The introduction of 27% reservation for students of other backward communities in all institutions of higher education will provide equal opportunity in the field of education.

Steps to implement universal primary education will help the rural poor to get better means of livelihood and a better life for them.

Performance of NCP Ministers

The NCP Ministers have proved by their performance their capacity in evolving effective schemes and programmes in their areas of operation and their efficiency for speedy implementation of those schemes. They have been applauded by all concerned as the most effective ministers.

Agriculture

In a country where agriculture was being neglected for the last many years and the production of food grains was coming down and shortage of food articles was being increasingly experienced, Shri Sharad Pawar, within the last five years has worked wonders in the agricultural sector.

As more than 65% of the population of our country depend on agriculture and agriculture related activities for their livelihood, Pawarji knew that the prosperity of India lies in the growth of the agriculture sector and the increase in the production and productivity in the sector.

Pawarji with his wide experience in the field of agriculture and extensive interaction with farmers chalked out plans and schemes to solve the problems the farmer community was experiencing and implemented the schemes with determination.

He managed to get the budget allotment for agriculture, which stood below 2% of the total budget allotment, revised and increased to 4.5%.

Steps for increasing productivity

He was successful in attracting substantial investment in the agriculture sector, which enabled him to provide irrigation, water and electricity supply to farmers at reasonable rates. More allocation of funds was made for irrigation. More land was brought under irrigation.

As a step to rejuvenate agriculture sector, the National Food Security Mission was launched in 2007 to enhance production and productivity of rice, wheat and pulses and make us self sufficient in food grains. The scheme was implemented in 312 districts spread over seventeen important rice, wheat and pulses growing states in the country. Consequently, significant increase has been recorded in the productivity of rice and wheat in those districts. The overall increase in production of wheat and rice in the succeeding years has been three million tons of wheat and three million tons of rice.

A number of other schemes also have been launched during these five years to give focused attention to increase productivity. The National Horticulture Mission, Central Institute of Horticulture in Nagaland, Jute Technology Mission, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna, National Project on Management of Soil, Health and Fertility, National Bamboo Technology & Trade Development, National Project on Organic Farming are a few of them.

Farming made profitable

Side by side with the implementation of those schemes, urgent steps were taken to solve the problems of the farmers and to make farming profitable.

Minimum support price

Substantial increase was made in the minimum support price of rice and wheat and other food grains and cotton. The procurement price of rice which stood at Rs. 550/- in 2004 has been increased to Rs. 900/- for ‘B’ grade and Rs. 930/- and the MSP for wheat has been increased to Rs. 1,080/-.

Restrictions imposed on farmers to sell their products to private agencies was removed and the farmers were given freedom to sell their products to anybody for better price.

Loans were made available for farming at reduced rate of interest and that also at easy terms and conditions from all banks. The banks have started issuing crop loans to farmers at 7% interest and the banks will be compensated by the government. Loans up to Rs. 50,000/- for farming are being now issued security free.

Tens of thousands of farmers who had availed of loans from banks and private money lenders at exhorbitant rates of interest could not repay the loans because of successive failure of crops caused by draughts and floods. The steps taken by the banks for recovery of the accumulated debts had driven many of them to suicide. Waiver of all such accumulated debts were implemented by the government to save the affected farmers from their miserable situations.

Waiver of accumulated debts

The scheme of debt waiver and debt relief for farmers is under implementation. Direct agricultural accumulated debt in arrears in scheduled commercial banks, regional rural banks and cooperative credit institutions upto 31st March 2007 and was overdue as on 31st December 2007 has been written off. About 3.68 crores farmers have been benefited involving a debt waiver of Rs. 65,318.33 crores. Subsequently, the waiver scheme has been extended to the fishing sector also increasing the allotment to 71,000 crore.

Packages

Relief packages including rehabilitation of affected farmers were implemented for farmers of 31 draught affected districts from different states which were also suicide prone districts of the country.

Special packages for Kuttanad Development with a fund allotment of Rs. 1,840.75 crores for the overall development of agriculture in Kuttanad and package with a total allotment of Rs. 1,190.00 crores have been sanctioned for rejuvenating the agricultural activities in Idukki and the cost of agriculture portion of the package amounting to Rs. 764.00 crores have been sanctioned by the agriculture ministry.

Second Green Revolution

The various schemes and steps taken by Shri Sharad Pawar to rejuvenate agriculture and to enthuse the farmers have paved the way for a second green revolution. As productivity and production increased considerably and farming became profitable, the farmers who had abandoned farming earlier, started farming again and more and more land was brought under cultivation. Last year, India, has record production in rice, wheat, pulses and other food articles and we have attained self sufficiency in food grains.

India is the highest producer of cotton, milk and sugar consistently for the last three years. Our granaries are full. We have not only got assured food security but are also capable of exporting food articles. Many countries are now approaching India seeking help to solve their problems of food shortage.

Civil Aviation

The performance of Shri Praful Patel in the civil aviation sector has been exemplary. In these five years, unprecedented growth has been recorded in this sector. He has initiated unprecedented expansion in aviation industry.

World-class airports are coming up in Delhi and Mumbai. All the main airports in the state capitals and other big cities are being modernized. Dozens of new airports have come up in various parts of the country. Multiplicity of domestic flights is being operated. International flight connectivity has also increased considerably and Air India flights are now reaching out to many distant foreign countries. There has been hundred times increase in the number of air passengers. Airports have become more crowded than railway station. Air traffic has grown up considerably in our country.

The entire country has expressed their unreserved appreciation of the performance of the aviation ministry.

Rural Development

The Rural Development ministry has made wonderful performance during the last five years of UPA regime. Smt. Suryakanta Patil, NCP Minister of state for Rural Development & Parliamentary Affairs has taken the initiative for formulating various projects for providing for the all round development of the rural poor. Greater emphasis has been given for housing, sanitation, safe drinking water, constructing village roads and employment opportunities for the weaker sections and disadvantaged sections of the society. The National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, which she had been instrumental for formulation and for getting it approved has been a boon for the rural poor which guarantees 100 days’ work a year for those who register their names for work under the scheme. More than 5.70 crores job seekers were provided with work. The massive housing schemes providing Rs.35,000/- for each house by the government, the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna connecting all habitations with all weather roads, the scheme providing sanitation and safe drinking water to the villages are bringing out fast development in the lives of the people. We are proud of the initiative and consistent endeavour on the part of Smt. Suryakanta Patil for her contribution in providing a better life for the villagers.

Important issues before the country

The global economic crisis that has caused collapse of the economy and retrenchment lakhs of employees working in financial and technical institutions and closing down hundreds of business firms in foreign countries. Though not in that magnitude it is having its effects on Indian economy as well.

Lakhs of Indians including skilled labours, who had been employed in various foreign countries, especially in the developed countries, who have lost their jobs are returning to India. Not only has this affected the contributions of the NRIs to our economy, but has created the problems of rehabilitating them.

The plight of Indian skilled workers returning home because of global meltdown deserve urgent attention. The skilled Indian workers in the past have remitted huge amounts of money, which has helped the country in swelling its forex reserves. Therefore, it is the duty of the government to help these personnel, small/medium scale enterprises by giving them liberal loans at a very concessional rate.

The mixed economy we pursue giving equal importance to public sector, private sector and joint sector has helped us to withstand the onslaught of the world economic recession. But it has slowed down our economic growth, increased our unemployment problems and other related matters. It has reduced export business and multiplied our problems in the sector.

Two packages have already been declared by the government and the banks and government has adopted some measures to ease the situation. But still the situation has not been brought under control.

The onslaught of the global economic recession has started affecting our economy also. Large-scale retrenchments, lay offs, causalisation of employees are creating serious employment problems.

Our economic reforms should necessarily be implemented with a human face. It shall not affect the employment sector negatively.

Under the circumstances, our industries have to concentrate on goods for domestic consumption. Domestic consumption should be encouraged for which the purchasing capacity of the people should be improved. Cheaper goods to meet market competition should be targeted. The growth in the agriculture sector will certainly contribute to the purchasing power of the people to some extent. More investment on infrastructure development, widening the scope of employment guarantee scheme and on other rural development activities would improve the purchasing capacity of the people.

The Employment Guarantee Scheme will be a blessing for the unemployed rural poor and it will contribute a lot to improve their purchasing capacity.

In this connection, NCP insists on increasing the scope of the NREGS. More days of work should be guaranteed and all the people prepared to work should be covered by the scheme and the wages paid to them should be reasonably increased.

Self help groups should be encouraged to take up small industrial units for producing consumer goods should be encouraged. More and more infrastructure activities and schemes should be taken up by the government departments. The government and the banks should come out with financial support for these activities. More private investment should be attracted for infrastructure development. They should be encouraged in air connectivity and road connectivity between all state capitals. Inter-linking national rivers should be taken up under joint venture.

In view of the collapse of a large number of banks and insurance companies in developed countries consequent on the world economic crisis, our banks and insurance companies should be protected from foreign companies and private players.

Public undertakings of strategic importance should not be disinvested.

Human Resource Development

The basic requirement of human development is education. Every step should be taken to improve the employability of our youths. General education should be made employment oriented.

The following guidelines will be followed in our education system:

1. Speedy and effective implementation of the universalisation of primary education, vocationalisation of secondary education and modernization of higher education, so as to improve their employability, enable them to take up self employment schemes and to improve their expertise.
2. Equal opportunity for students of all sections to get educated in prestigious institutions of higher education.
3. Infrastructure facilities for imparting universal primary education in each and every village.
4. Sufficient number of scholarships should be awarded for students of SC/ST and OBC categories.
5. Reservation of seats and scholarship should be awarded to the students of economically backward sections of the upper class communities.
6. Science and technology should be given its due importance in the system of our education.

Health

A new public health policy recognizing the health rights of the people in general and the marginalized sections in particular would be introduced.

Primary health centres would be provided with necessary doctors, staff, medical equipments and regular medical supply.

Life saving medicines would be made available at affordable rates.

Mid day meals programme for school going children would be strengthened.

Comprehensive schemes to combat malnutrition among the children.

Food security for those belonging to the weaker sections of the society.

Specialty hospitals would be started in different parts of the country where medical treatment would be available at reasonable rates.

Management of Health Institutions and Specialty Hospitals

Health service is one of the most neglected service run by the government. The health institutions and hospitals with all modern facilities and specialists should be started on public, private, partnership basis as is being successfully implemented in states like Karnataka, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya.

Social security

Time bound schemes for making drinking water, electricity should be made available to all the villages.

Public distribution system should be strengthened.

Minimum requirement of food supply should be assured through PDS outlets to all the needy irrespective of poverty line.

Comprehensive housing scheme for rehabilitation of all dwellers of slums, bastis and tribal colonies provided with drinking water, electricity, healthcare and education institutions should be implemented.

Energy

1. Our energy shortage has to be addressed with priority. We have to give more importance to non conventional energy.

2. Unless and until substantial budgetary provision is made by the Union government and state governments as well as encourage private investment for generation of energy, the gap between demand and supply in the energy sector cannot be eliminated.

3. We will give necessary help to harness solar energy. Similarly, we shall encourage harnessing of Wind Energy for which there is great scope in our country.

4. Instead of depending entirely on foreign countries for nuclear material supply for our nuclear plants, we should have long term but specific plans for developing Thorium, which we have in abundance in our country for nuclear power generation in the place of Uranium.

Agriculture

Agriculture sector, which provides livelihood to about 65% of population in our country will be given topmost priority in our development schemes.

1. Budget allotment for agriculture sector and irrigation will be substantially increased.
2. More land will be brought under cultivation.
3. Special efforts will be made for further increase in production and productivity in agriculture with special attention to the production of oil seeds and pulses.
4. Remunerative prices will be made available for all agriculture products including cash crop products.
5. Agro processing units and agro based industries will be encouraged.
6. Equal importance will be given to the development of diary farming and up gradation of cattle wealth.
7. Development of fisheries sector also will be intensified. Assistance will be given to the fishing community for deep sea fishing and processing and export.

NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC ALLIANCE

An Agenda for
Development, Good Governance, Peace, and Harmony

Elections to the 14th Lok Sabha
April-May 2004

Introduction

The first National Democratic Alliance Government was elected to office in 1998. It was re-elected in 1999. Under Prime Minister Shri Atal Bihari Vajpayee's visionary leadership, the NDA is seeking a renewed mandate, in the 2004 General Election, to serve the nation for another five years.

The NDA had promised to end political instability created by the Congress party's dangerous destabilizing tactics. We have done so by giving India a stable and purposive government under an able leader.

Adhering to the canons of "Coalition Dharma"mutual trust, regular consultation, consensus building, and acceptance of a common approach, the NDA has shown how a coalition can work unitedly to fulfill the people's aspirations.

We have lived up to our 1999 manifesto declaration: "The NDA is a representative of both national interests and regional aspirationsthe NDA is … the mirror-image of our nation's unity in multifaceted diversity, rich pluralism, and federalism."

The NDA Government has taken India forward on all fronts during the past five years. Our common manifesto in the 1999 elections was called, "An Agenda For a Proud, Prosperous India". Today, India is more prosperous than ever before. There is greater pride, hope, and self-confidence among Indians than ever earlier. Today, India stands tall on the international stage, with greater prestige and recognition.

In five years, our country has demonstrated its ability to overcome the legacy of past problems and to embrace the opportunities of the 21st century. There is peace on the Indo-Pak border, entirely due to the Government's firm but bold efforts to enable bilateral relations to move from seemingly never-ending enmity to amity. An atmosphere has been created for resolving all outstanding issues through dialogue. This positive development is pregnant with possibilities not only for India and Pakistan, but also for the future of
South Asia.

Jammu & Kashmir basks again in the sunshine of regained peace, well set now on the road to development. The holding of free and fair elections in 2002, and the commitment to a dialogue process, has generated new hope in the State. Troubled parts of the North-East are seeing fruits of the NDA Government's consistent pursuit of peace and conflict-resolution through dialogue. The NDA Government is now resolving the problems left in these regions as legacies of long Congress misrule.

We have finally left behind our years of stagnation and slow economic growth that marked most of the first fifty years of our independence. A GDP growth rate of 8%, which our opponents had cynically derided as "Mungeri Lal ke haseen sapne", has become real and will be exceeded, despite the country having faced a string of natural calamities. Last year, our efficient and effective management, of severe drought situation in fourteen States, was without precedent. Prices of essential commodities remain under control.

Agricultural production will surpass all previous records. Our forex reserves exceed the $ 110 billion mark.

Many areas of India's manufacturing sector, earlier written off by critics, have now attained global competitiveness. The past five years have not only brought pride to the "Made in India" label, but have also made "Served from India" the first choice of global companies. This sunrise sector has generated new employment. This new offshoot of the Knowledge Economy complements India's globally recognized strengths in software exports, which have grown more than five times in the last five years to cross Rs. 48,000 crore.

Poor and inadequate infrastructure, which was the debilitating legacy of the Congress years, has been replaced by a world-class infrastructure for India, built by Indians, in India. We have set in motion what the Prime Minister has aptly termed as a "Connectivity Revolution". Telecom connectivity, Internet connectivity, highway connectivity, and rural roads connectivity are just the initial, visible successes of this revolution. We are determined to replicate these successes in other critical areas of infrastructure power, railways, airports, ports, irrigation, etc. where bottlenecks have severely constrained economic growth and employment generation.

The past five years has seen a huge boom in housing construction. We have over-fulfilled our promise, made in 1999, of facilitating construction of twenty lakh new houses each year. We take pride in the fact that the Vajpayee Government built more houses for the rural poor under the Indira Awaas Yojana in the last five years than the Congress or Congress-supported governments did in the previous fourteen years since the inception of the scheme.

"Our common manifesto in the 1999 elections was called, 'An Agenda For a Proud, Prosperous India'. Today, India is more prosperous than ever before. There is greater pride, hope, and self-confidence among Indians than ever earlier. Today, India stands tall on the international stage, with greater prestige and recognition."

Creating one crore additional employment opportunities a year was an important promise contained in our 1999 manifesto. We have substantially fulfilled that promise. Between 2000-2003, 82 lakh employment and self-employment opportunities were created on average each year. The Rs. 1,000-crore Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana, started by our Government, is the biggest food-for-work program since Independence.

Our Government launched some of the biggest-ever social development initiatives in the world. These include the Antyodaya Anna Yojana and the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan. The coverage of the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS), which is the world's largest early childcare program, was greatly expanded. Major initiatives, such as establishment of a separate ministry for tribal affairs, were taken to promote the cause of social justice.

We now seek a renewed term to carry forward our agenda. Responding to the aspirations and expectations of the people, the NDA has made "Development", "Good Governance", and "Peace", as the main issues for Election 2004. Our commitment to these issues is further affirmed in this Manifesto.

India is prosperous, and developing. Millions of Indians have got employment, bought houses, use cell phones, and are getting better education for their children. Yet, millions more still await their chance of benefiting from and contributing to the Great Indian Dream. Inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's advocacy of "Antyodaya", the NDA Government is committed to reaching the fruits of development to all; for we believe that the deprived and the denied have the first call on the resources and the attention of the Indian State.

Our vision

India as a Developed Nation

Our Goal:

8 to 10% GDP growth rate on a sustainable basis over the next five years, with eradication of poverty by 2015. Clear five-yearly milestones for economic growth and social development will be set for each State and district

Our Guiding Principle:

Faster growth with employment, equity, social justice, reduction in regional imbalances, and the urban-rural divide

The NDA believes that GDP growth, at an annual rate of 8 to 10% on a sustainable basis, is achievable. This will realize our strategic vision of making India a Developed Nation. We have full faith in the capacity of our hardworking kisans and workers, enterprising businessmen and traders, innovative managers, professionals, talented scientists, and dedicated administrators to achieve this goal.

The NDA is committed to making India an economic superpower through a seven-pronged strategy of:

1) India as the food factory of the world.
2) India as the global manufacturing hub.
3) India as the service provider to the world.
4) India as the centre of the knowledge economy.
5) India as the global tourism destination.
6) India as the global healthcare destination.
7) India as the global higher education destination.
Agriculture

The NDA Government gives highest priority to agriculture, since it is the mainstay of India's overall development. Our main objectives are:

1) Bring vibrancy to the rural economy.
2) Make agriculture remunerative even to small and marginal farmers by doubling the income of kisans by 2010, reducing the cost of cultivation, enhancing yields, and increasing prices receivable by farmers. We have, for the first time since Independence, set up a National Kisan Commission to address these imperatives. 
3) Double the rate of growth of public and private investment in agriculture.
4) Make India's eastern States, which have fertile land and plenty of water, a new food basket of India.
5) Increase the access of our farmers to markets, to competitive sources of finance, and to knowledge that allows them to compete in a global economy.
6) Increase value addition and reduce wastage at every stage in the food chain linking the kisan to the consumer, so that both benefit.
7) Make India the "Food Factory" of the world by producing high quality processed foods for global markets.
For achieving these objectives, the Prime Minister will formally launch the Second Green Revolution on August 15, 2004. Since agriculture is a state subject, the NDA will make efforts to secure the participation of States in implementing the following tasks under the Second Green Revolution, which will lead to an "Ever Green" Revolution.

Land, Water, and Power

1) Work will commence on the River-Linking Project, whose principal beneficiaries will be our farmers in water-scarce areas.
2) Completion of all the ongoing irrigation projects (major, medium, and minor) within five years to create irrigation for an additional 35 million hectares of land.
3) A Master Plan for ground water recharge will be implemented throughout the nation. 
4) Mandatory community participation in planning, execution, and maintenance of irrigation projects through mechanisms such as Water Users' Associations. 
5) Every district will draw up a comprehensive water management and soil enrichment strategy. 
6) A campaign will be launched to encourage drip irrigation, sprinkler irrigation and greenhouse technology. Land under these water-efficient systems will be increased five-fold in five years. Our slogan for this campaign would be "More Crop per Drop".
7) A National Mission for Rainfed Agriculture will be launched to benefit two-thirds of India's cropped area, and 80% of small and marginal farmers who are dependent on rains. It will focus on the watershed approach, use of better seeds, dissemination of relevant farm technologies, soil enrichment, and commercialization of everything that grows on arid lands, including weeds and wild plants. 
8) Adequate supply of quality power will be ensured to all farmers by 2009.
9) Wasteland development for agriculture, horticulture, afforestation, bio-mass production, cultivation of bamboo and bio-fuels, and other productive uses will be taken up on a mission mode. All programs, currently under different ministries, will be brought under a single agency. The National Wasteland Development Board will be reactivated to put at least 25 million hectares of wasteland to productive use by 2009 that is, by doubling the rate of coverage under all the existing programs. The Centre will draw up a model law for better management of land and other natural resources through community participation, private investments, corporate-cooperative collaboration, and by making landless laborers, small farmers, ex-servicemen, and unemployed youth partners in every initiative for wasteland development. The model law will be commended to State Governments to pass similar legislations and set up suitably empowered authorities to implement this important mission. 
10) Organic farming will be promoted to reverse soil degradation produce "natural" foods that are becoming popular the world over. Fiscal and other forms of support will be given for production of bio-fertilizers and bio-pesticides.
11) Leasing in and leasing out of lands within farmers would be permitted through enabling legislation.
12) With the cooperation of the State governments, all revenue records and land transfer systems will be computerized and linked to a Geographical Information System.
Finance and Insurance

1) Greater Plan Funds shall be earmarked for agriculture, irrigation, rural development and allied areas. 
2) A Task Force will be set up to recommend, within the first six months, policy and institutional measures to promote private sector investment in agriculture, especially in small and medium-scale irrigation projects, farm R&D, human resource development, post-harvest management, and marketing. Public and private investments, as well as investments by farmers themselves, will be synergized through partnerships. It needs to be underscored that private investment in agriculture does not mean corporate farming. 
3) Timely and adequate farm credit to kisans is as important as timely and adequate water for his crops. Therefore, steps will be taken to ensure enhanced credit flow to the sector, make credit affordable at interests lower than prime lending rates (PLR), eliminate procedural delays, and introduce greater competition in credit delivery. The process of giving all eligible farmers a Kisan Credit Card will be completed before August 15, 2004. Card-holders will be able to use ATM facility wherever it exists. Our aim will be to create a well-developed farm credit system, which will end the need for farmers to go to money lenders.
4) Projects under the newly announced Loknayak Jaiprakash Narayan Fund of Rs. 50,000 crore for agriculture infrastructure and credit will be given fast-track clearance.
5) The Government will give priority attention to strengthening cooperative banks and other cooperative credit institutions. The Rs. 15,000-crore fund announced for this purpose in the interim budget will be made operational. Necessary steps will be taken to ensure that cooperative institutions are run on professional and sound commercial lines, while retaining their democratic character.
6) All States will be encouraged to bring their cooperative laws in conformity with the Multi-State Cooperative Act passed by the Centre.
7) Full support will be provided for setting up cold storages, godowns, grain banks, and fodder banks. Kisans keeping their produce in accredited godowns/grain banks will be entitled to avail bank credit with the introduction of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts.
8) The comprehensive crop insurance scheme and the newly launched farm income insurance scheme will be more intensively and efficiently implemented.
Technology, Training, and Extension Services

1) Launch of a national program to use bio-technology for evolving plants that consume less water, are drought-resistant, contain more nutrition, give higher yield, and are environmentally safe.
2) Resources for agricultural R&D will be trebled in the next five years. Its focus on new yield-enhancing and cost-reducing agriculture practices, new seeds, etc. To close the gap between "Lab to Land", multiple kinds of partnerships will be established between the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR), Krishi Vigyan Kendras, agriculture universities, agri-business companies, and farmers' organizations. 
3) Agriculture extension and consultancy services will be made a thrust area, with private sector participation. Necessary bank credit and institutional support will be made available for the establishment of at least one "Krishi Seva Kendra" in every village. The "Kisan Call Centre" service (which uses a nationwide toll-free telephone number 1551) will be made operational nationwide and in all local languages. Besides benefiting farmers, these agri-consultancy services will create employment and income-enhancing opportunities for over five lakh educated youth and local agriculture experts. 
4) Opportunities for education and training in agriculture and allied activities will be vastly expanded. Our aim will be to ensure that every farmer undergoes some training or participates in some farm-education program every year.
5) A comprehensive, countrywide program will be launched for the technological improvement of farm machinery, implements, and tools.
Agricultural Markets

1) States will be given incentives to amend the Agricultural Produce and Marketing Committee (APMC) Act and abolish mandi taxes. This will enable farmers to access competitive markets, sell their produce directly to processing industries and to consumers, thus realizing better prices.
2) All the remaining restrictions on the free movement of agricultural goods across any part of the country will be removed within one year. The Essential Commodities Act will be revised.
3) A Rs. 1,000 crore Mandi Development Fund will be created to support modernization of agriculture markets.
4) Commodity exchanges will be encouraged to reach futures trading services to all farmers through smaller contract sizes and by covering a wider range of crops. This will lessen the dependence on Minimum Support Prices.
5) The present system of setting Minimum Support Prices by the Commission on Agricultural Costs and Prices will be reviewed to further benefit all kisans.
6) The present system of procurement through the Food Corporation of India will be revamped to make it cheaper to buy, store, transport, and export food grains.
7) A chain of farmers' haats (markets), on the pattern of "Ryuthu Bazaar" in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, will be established throughout the country, where farmers can sell directly to customers.
Food Processing

1) The NDA believes that the food processing industry can make our rural economy vibrant in the same manner that IT has made our national economy prosper. Currently, we process only 2% of the value of our agricultural produce. A Task Force shall come up with an action plan to raise this to 10% in five years. It will comprehensively address the main problems facing India's food processing industry: size, fragmentation, inefficiency, low value-addition, low quality standards, and inadequate logistical support. It will enable the industry to meet the needs of Indian consumers both at the low end and the high end. It will enable industry to access agriculture produce directly from farmers, and suggest ways to step up exports, including to organized retail outlets abroad.
2) Tariff and investment support for setting up food processing industries, especially in backward regions, will be stepped up.
3) The foremost task in food processing in India is to reduce the distance between production and processing. Therefore, every rural branch of a bank will be required to identify agro-processing potential in its region and finance such enterprises. Local administration will be required to provide necessary infrastructure support. We shall set up a chain of Primary Processing Centres close to the farmers. These will sort, grade, process, store, and pack agricultural and horticultural produce for shipment to markets and further value-addition.
4) A Unified Food Law, the lack of which is a critical impediment in the faster development of food-processing industries, will be enacted within the first six months.
5) An independent Food Regulatory Authority will be set up within six months. This shall be responsible for setting and enforcing standards for all food products.
6) A Task Force will be set up, within first three months, to recommend short-term and long-term measures to address the problems faced by sugarcane growers and sugar mills, and to enable Indian sugar industry to become a major player in global markets. Production of ethanol and power through co-generation plants will be stepped up.
7) India is the largest milk producer in the world. Yet, less than 5% of milk production is processed. A Dairy Industry Development Plan will be drawn up, within the first six months, with the principal aim of enhancing rural incomes and employment generation. It will provide increased fiscal and investment support for dairy units, especially in northern and eastern States. The focus of this plan will be doubling capacity in five years, technology upgradation, expansion of the domestic market, and realization of the industry's full export potential. It will also address the downstream side of the industry better species, fodder, veterinary services, credit needs of kisans, etc.
8) Major thrust will be given to the poultry industry to double egg production, quadruple poultry meat production, and increase exports from Rs. 250 crore to Rs. 1,000 crore. This is expected to increase employment in poultry from the current 20 lakh to 50 lakh in five years. Poultry farming will be recognized as an agricultural activity and all benefits applicable to agriculture will be extended to it.
9) An experts' committee will be set up, within thirty days, to recommend measures to minimize wastage and damages along the food chain.
Crops

1) An action plan for massive crop diversification, multi-cropping, and doubling per-acre yields of all crops will be prepared. Every village will be encouraged to set its own yearly targets. Successful farmers will be suitably recognized.
2) Efforts will be intensified to achieve self-sufficiency in pulses and oil-seeds in five years.
3) Horticulture and floriculture production will be doubled in five years. Vegetable cultivation and mushroom farming, especially near towns and cities will be promoted.
4) Additional measures will be initiated for addressing the problems faced by growers of plantation crops-tea, coffee, coconut, areca nut, rubber, cashew and spices, for enabling India to retain its leadership position in these crops.
5) The national missions for development of bio-fuels and bamboo, which were launched last year, will be made operational. Cultivation of medicinal plants and aromatic plants, which have considerable export potential, will be further promoted.
6) A Technology Mission for improving jute production and value-addition will be launched.
Animal husbandry and Fisheries

1) Animal husbandry, which provides full and partial employment to over two crore Indians, will be fully promoted to achieve the ends of rural prosperity and social justice. A National Cattle Development Board will be set up with adequate budgetary support. Among other things, it will prepare a program for improvement of livestock breeds, with a major thrust on genetic improvement of indigenous cattle, buffalo, and other animals linked to the rural economy. Establishment of Goshalas and Pinjrapoles will be encouraged. Efforts will be made to evolve consensus for passing a Central legislation for protection of cow and her progeny. Recommendations of the newly-established National Cattle Commission will be implemented.
2) A National Commission for Fisheries and Aquaculture will be set up for promoting all-round development of marine and inland fisheries, and speedy socio-economic progress of fishermen. Deep sea fishing industry will be developed to take advantage of India's long coastline and its exclusive economic zone. Fishermen's cooperatives will be helped to modernize their trawlers, set up cold storages and processing plants, and establish direct linkages with domestic and foreign markets.
3) India is the second largest wool producer in the world. However, our wool industry is by and large at a low level of quality and value realization. An action plan will be prepared for its modernization and expansion. The newly established Development and Finance Corporation for the Shepherd Community will be made operational.
Agricultural Workers

Effective steps will be taken to ensure sustainable year-long employment, with minimum wages for agricultural workers. They will be brought under the social security scheme for unorganized workers and the proposed Antyodaya Swasthya Yojana. They will be given priority in rural housing. Training programs for raising their productivity and skills will be encouraged.

Other issues

1) Women play a major, albeit unrecognized, role in Indian agriculture. A special scheme will be launched to empower women in kisan families, enrich their capabilities, and augment their incomes. 
2) An extensive campaign will be launched to educate Indian kisans about the WTO Agreement on Agriculture, the challenges and opportunities in global trade in agriculture after the removal of Quantitative Restrictions, and how a partnership between the government, businesses, cooperatives, and kisans can help the country meet the challenges and capture the opportunities.
The "Second Green Revolution" will follow a strategy distinctly different from the one that defined the First Green Revolution. The latter focused mostly on the popularization of high-yielding crop varieties to overcome food shortage. In contrast, the Second Green Revolution will embrace the entire Agro-Economy, from the farmer to the consumer. It will harness a bouquet of new technologies, space, IT, BT. It will also focus on water-efficient irrigation systems, environment-friendly pesticides, precision agriculture, agriculture markets, food processing, rural infrastructure, etc.

Many of the activities mentioned above are looked after by different Departments and Ministries. For better coordination, a Cabinet Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will be set up.

Rural Development

The Government's main thrust in the coming five years will be to bridge the rural-urban divide through implementation of the PURA (Provision of Urban Amenities in Rural Areas) program. Under this program, to be implemented in ten thousand rural clusters across the country in five years, every cluster will be provided with four types of connectivities:

(a) physical connectivity, which includes good roads and power supply; 
(b) digital connectivity, which includes modern telecom and IT services;
(c) knowledge connectivity, which includes good schools and vocational training centers; and 
(d) market connectivity, which includes good market infrastructure.
Specifically,

Village electrification will be completed by 2007 through an accelerated implementation of the program to cover 1 crore households and 1 lakh villages.
All villages will have primary health centers within the village, dispensaries within five to eight kilometers, and referral hospitals within twenty kilometers.
PURA will be launched before August 15, 2004.
Rural Sanitation

Lack of safe drinking water and sanitation is the cause of 80% of all diseases and ailments. 67% of India's rural population and 22% of our urban population has no access to toilets. This is a source of embarrassment and discontent among the youth, especially young women. The NDA is committed to changing this sad reality.

The Total Sanitation Campaign, launched by the NDA Government in 1999, has been a remarkable success. Necessary funds will be mobilized to ensure that all the TSC projects will be fully implemented in five years, ensuring that all the 8.4 crore uncovered rural households will have access to basic sanitation either their own or community-owned. There shall be no Anganwadi centre or rural/urban school without water and toilet facilities by 2005. Priority will be given to girls' schools and schools in tribal and remote areas.

Drinking water

More than Rs. 40,000 crore have been invested in the rural water supply sector during the last five decades by the Central and State Governments. However, the results have not been commensurate with this investment, primarily because the schemes did not have an in-built mechanism for people's participation, panchayat ownership, and bureaucratic accountability. The NDA Government removed this shortcoming by launching the "Swajaldhara" program in December 2002. Under this, 90% of funds on capital cost would be given by the Centre directly to Panchayats. The remaining 10% of the capital cost and full Operation and Maintenance (O&M) responsibility will be borne by the community.

All the existing rural drinking water supply schemes would be brought under the reforms agenda of "Swajaldhara"-making them "demand-driven" rather than "supply-driven" to ensure their long-term sustainability. Adequate funds will be mobilized for its enlarged implementation with the following commitments:

(a) Every rural habitation in the country, including those that have slipped back into the Partially Covered or Non-Covered status, will be provided an assured source of drinking water supply by 2007; 
(b) A community-based program for water quality monitoring would be initiated; 
(c) Water supply departments and nigams of State Governments would be reformed; 
(d) Panchayats would be given incentives for rainwater harvesting, raising ground-water levels, and augmentation and cleaning up of water sources such as village ponds, wells, rivulets, etc.
Infrastructure

The Connectivity Revolution, which was launched by the NDA Government, and has already yielded visible results in several sectors, will be further accelerated. Specifically, our Government will do the following in the coming five years:

Roads

1) Timely completion of the National Highway Development Project (nearly 15,000 km): Phase 1 (Golden Quadrilateral) by 2005; Phase 2 (East-West and North-South Corridors) by 2008; Pradhan Mantri Bharat Jodo Pariyojana (additional 10,000 km, linking all those State capitals not covered by NHDP, as well as important commercial centers in all the States, to NHDP with 4/6 lane highways) by 2009.
2) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana: Linking all rural habitations with a population above 1,000 by 2005; linking all rural habitations with a population above 500 by 2007.
3) Private investment in public transport systems will be encouraged. States will be given incentives to speed up restructuring of their road transport corporations. At least five thousand new buses will be added to their fleets every year through a special fund. A separate fund for improvement of all the Inter-State Bus Terminals and District Bus Stations will also be set up.
4) In addition to road construction, a program for creation of road services like parking facilities, hotels, shops, medical facilities, business centers, food kiosks, etc. in a well-planned manner, will be taken up.
5) Road safety has not received adequate attention in India. As many as 78,000 people die in road accidents each year. The Government will start a National Road Safety Mission, with necessary legal, regulatory, technology and mass awareness measures.
"Sampoorna Sadak Connectivity"

A new program called the "Pradhan Mantri Pradesh Sadak Yojana" (PMPSY) will be launched to improve all the State Highways and district roads in the country. These are the weak link in our road network that includes world-class national highways on one end and rapidly improving rural roads on the other end. The blueprint of this program, including its funding and monitoring, will be prepared after detailed consultation with State Governments. Reform of State PWDs and participation of the private sector will be the highlights of this new project. PMPSY will provide the missing link in the comprehensive road connectivity revolution, to be called the "Sampoorna Sadak Connectivity" initiative, whose other three links are already being implemented by our Governmentnamely, National Highways Development Program (NHDP), Pradhan Mantri Bharat Jodo Pariyojana (PMBJP), and the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY).

Railways

Railways are the lifeline of our nation. They are also the most important logistical support system for the Indian economy. Unprecedented expansion and modernization of India's railway infrastructure over the next five years will be our commitment.

1) Implementation of works under the Rs. 15,000-crore National Rail Vikas Yojana, launched in December 2002, will be completed in time.
2) Implementation of the Rs. 20,000-crore Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana, which was announced in the interim railway budget in January 2004, will start this year. Under this ambitious new initiative, all incomplete railway projects in remote and backward areas of our country, whose completion by the earlier "Congress speed of implementation" would take 20 to 25 years, will be completed within the next five years.
3) We shall complete the rail connectivity from Kanyakumari to Kashmir, to complement the completion of the four-lane highway connectivity from Kanyakumari to Kashmir, by speedily implementing the Udhampur-Katra-Baramulla railway line. The first ever train will roll into Kashmir Valley before August 15, 2007, carrying the Prime Minister as its first passenger.
4) Implementation of works under the Rs. 17,000-crore Special Railway Safety Fund, set up by the NDA Government in 2002, will be completed in time. The Technology Mission for Railway Safety will be made operational in 2004. Our aim will be to reach standards of railway safety in advanced countries by 2008.
5) Speed of goods trains on important lines will be increased to over 100 kmph.
6) The Railway Design and Standards Organization (RDSO) will be completely overhauled to make it a world-class R&D organization, with strong external linkages, capable of infusing new technology, which our railway network requires.
7) Operation Cleanliness will be completed by 2007 to give a new image to Indian Railways.
8) Metro rail projects will be started in many more cities. The "Skybus" system shall be promoted on a pilot basis.
9) At least one bullet train project will be initiated. 
10) A Rs. 5,000-crore Railway Station Improvement Fund shall be set up to improve passenger amenities in all important railway stations over five years. The fund will be raised from railway users and augmented by public-private partnerships.
Railway Reforms

Long-overdue reforms in the structure and functioning of Indian Railways, its finances, tariff fixation, investment plans, and project implementation will be speedily implemented. All non-core activities will be corporatized with their own effective board management. Critical projects will be re-designed to attract non-budgetary and private investments. The huge value hidden in the assets of Indian Railways, and in its under-utilized capacities, will be realized. Devolution of powers to zonal and lower levels will be effected. An independent Rail Tariff Regulatory Authority will be set up on the lines of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission.

Ports and Shipping

1) "Sagar Mala", conceived by the NDA Government in 2003, is the most ambitious ever program for development and modernization of India's ports, shipping, shipyards, and inland navigation. Its aim is to make India a major maritime nation in the world, harnessing the long coastline that our country is blessed with. To be completed in ten years, it envisages new investments of over Rs. 100,000 crore, coming mostly from private and foreign investors. "Sagar Mala" will be launched before August 15, 2005.
2) The operational efficiency of all major Indian ports will be raised to global standards within five years. Towards this end, the Government will effect complete overhaul in the management of Indian ports, including corporatizing each port and bringing private investment and management skills.
3) Sethusamudram project in Tamil Nadu will be speedily completed.
4) Rail and road connectivity to ports will be further improved. 
5) The value of unused and under-used land and production assets in ports will be realized.
6) Major boost will be given to global shipping under the Indian flag.
7) Employment potential in seafaring will be fully harnessed through a National Maritime University of India with associated training colleges.
Airports and Civil Aviation

1) The proposed new "Open Skies" Civil Aviation Policy will be adopted within the first thirty days.
2) Ten Indian cities, designated to be developed as Global Cities, will have world-class airports.
3) Planned fleet acquisition program of Indian Airlines and Air India will be completed before the end of 2004. Air India will be promoted as India's proud national carrier.
4) All airports in the country will be brought under the framework of public-private partnerships.
5) Air connectivity to remote areas, such as in the North-Eastern States, will be further strengthened.
6) New international airport projects for Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore and Hyderabad will be completed within the next three to four years and the Prime Minister will inaugurate them before August 15, 2008.
7) One hundred small airstrips across the country will be activated for daylight flying of small passenger and cargo planes. This will bring air connectivity to many district centers in remote and backward areas.
Telecom and IT infrastructure

1) Further accelerating the revolution in telecom connectivity, which began in 1999, the number of telephones will be increased from 7 crore at present to more than 30 crore by 2009. This will ensure that, on average, every alternate Indian family will have a telephone.
2) No Indian village will be without telecom services after 2007. Rural teledensity will be increased more than five-fold in five years. 
3) The number of Internet connections will be increased five-fold from 40 lakhs at present to 2 crore.
4) PCOs will be encouraged to become multi-purpose IT kiosks and serve as the e-interface between citizens and providers of services, including government services. These will create several lakh new employment opportunities. 
5) Broadband communication can revolutionalize all sectors of the Indian economy. It can also bring about a paradigm change in the content and delivery of education and entertainment. Therefore, a comprehensive policy will soon be formulated to promote affordable broadband connectivity. This will embrace all the landline and wireless phone users, cable TV homes, and cinema halls. Promotion of state-of-the-art wireless technologies will be a key part of this policy.
6) India's economy, government and education will be IT-enabled at all levels. Implementation of a national E-Governance strategy will begin before August 15, 2004. E-Seva will be made the common platform for citizens to pay bills for electricity, telephone, water, etc., register property, procure and submit government forms, etc. We will drastically reduce the need for citizens to go to a government office for services which can rendered electronically.
7) IT in Indian languages, including in the area of content creation, will be given special thrust.
8) Postal services will be revamped, modernized, and IT-enabled to provide a range of commercial and governmental services to the people.
9) Every high school and every college in the country will be given access to a high-speed Internet connection with access to rich educational content in local languages.
Meeting The Challenge Of Water

1) The River-Linking Project will be launched before August 15, 2004. An initial set of identified schemes will be implemented, with public participation, by 2015. An effective rehabilitation package for the project-affected persons shall be finalized and implemented.
2) Massive encouragement and legislative backing for local and micro initiatives such as watershed management, rainwater harvesting, drip irrigation, de-silting of tanks, lakes and reservoirs, restoration of wells, recycling of water, etc.
3) Cleaning up of rivers and traditional water bodies, with community participation, will be supported.
4) Desalination plants will be set up in coastal towns.
5) An independent Water Tariff Authority will be set up in each State to decide the water tariffs for industrial, commercial, residential, and agricultural usage.
6) A campaign will be launched to make people aware of the need to conserve every drop of water.
In view of the utmost importance and urgency of this issue, a "National Drinking Water Program" will be launched within the first thirty days. The Ministry of Finance will be directed to provide all required resources to implement this program in a time-bound manner. A Task Force will be set up to work out the modalities of this program, including innovative ways of financing it.

Power

In 1998, the NDA Government inherited not only an extremely difficult power situation, but also a defective power policy and a flawed sector reform program. We took immediate steps to change the direction of reform and reorient the policies and programs with a view to setting right the situation. Priority was given to reforms in distribution by providing Rs. 20,000 crore for improving the distribution network and another Rs. 20,000 crore for giving SEBs incentives to reduce their losses. By enacting the Electricity Act, 2003, the NDA Government gave a big push to power sector reforms. Our future commitments in this critical sector will be:

1) Elimination of electricity shortages by 2012; significant reduction by 2009.
2) At least 50,000 MW of additional generation capacity will be created over the next five years. Work on projects with a combined capacity of 12,000 MW (of which 8,000 MW in the private sector) will start before the end of 2004.
3) Robust National Grid - 25,000 MW of power transfer capability by 2009. 
4) SEB losses to be reduced to less than
Rs. 5,000 crore by 2009 from the current figure of Rs. 24,000 crore.
5) T&D losses shall be significantly reduced.
6) Power sector reforms, envisaged in the Electricity Act, will be completed before end of 2004.
7) Every consumer of electricity in India, including farmers, would be connected through digital, tamper-proof meters in the next three years.
8) Implementation of the 50,000 MW Hydroelectric Initiative.
9) Implementation of the 100,000 MW Thermal Power Initiative.
10) A major push for harnessing non-conventional energy sources. A National Program for biomass-based decentralized power generation in rural areas will be started. 
11) Energy conservation campaign will be intensified by promoting energy saving technologies.
We promise that the above tasks, when accomplished, will create not only a vibrant and healthy power sector, but the country will experience the benefit of power sector reforms, in the same manner as is being experienced in the Telecom Sector.
Industry

1) An action plan will be drawn up, within six months, to make India a global manufacturing hub in areas where we have established our competitive strengths: pharmaceuticals, automobiles, auto-components, engineering goods. New industries, especially in hi-tech areas, will be identified for development of such strengths.
2) In view of the good results achieved by industrial units that restructured themselves in recent years, this process will be further facilitated to cover all the remaining units. Our aim will be to eliminate all idle or grossly underutilized capacities in Indian industry in five years.
3) Indian capital goods industry, automobile industry, pharmaceutical industry, chemicals and petrochemicals industry, gems and jewelry industry will be encouraged to move up the technology ladder and value chain and to become global players.
4) Restructuring PSUs will be speeded up to enhance their profitability. Public sector executives will be empowered to have greater operational freedom and flexibility. Effective measures will be taken to stop losses incurred by ailing government undertakings. The process of disinvestment, which yielded good results this year, will be continued primarily to enhance and realize the hidden wealth in PSUs.
5) Out of the 461 projects being monitored by the Department of Programme Implementation, 100 will be taken up for fast-track completion in two years.
6) The Centre will facilitate the creation of a world-class industrial park in every State that is ready to lend necessary support.
7) We shall facilitate the creation of world-class Indian multinationals.
Coal

1) New coal mining projects will be started in 2004 to enhance existing capacity by 50 million tonnes. Focus will be on coking coal required for steel plants, and on coal for thermal power stations.
2) Necessary legislation will be introduced for encouraging private initiatives in the coal sector. 
3) Restructuring of coal PSUs to make them more efficient and profitable.
Oil & Natural Gas

1) Enhanced oil production through increased exploitation of own resources as well as purchase of ownership in oil fields overseas.
2) Dependence on fossil fuels to be lessened through a concerted drive for harnessing non-conventional energy sources. 
3) Competition in the oil and natural gas sector will be promoted through introduction of multiple players in the supply of products. 
4) Commercial exploitation of discovered gas fields will begin by 2005.
5) Gas grid quadrilateral covering the entire country will be completed by 2007.
6) The Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Bill will be enacted.
Steel & Aluminum

1) Policy and fiscal support will be provided for doubling steel production capacity in five years.
2) Improvement in technology for production of special and high-value steels.
3) Aluminium plants will be encouraged to become global players.
Mines

1) Policy will be reoriented, within three months, to encourage private investment in the mines sector.
2) Single-window clearance for harnessing of mineral resources such as iron ore, limestone, bauxite, and precious metals in an environmentally sustainable manner.
3) A raw material use policy will be unveiled in the mines sector.
Textiles

1) The government will launch a new initiative, to be called the Kabir Integrated Handloom Development Project, with an initial allocation of Rs. 1,000 crore. To be implemented in all the nearly two hundred plus handloom clusters in the country, it will have five growth objectives:

(a) to sustain and further increase the domestic market for handloom products. 
(b) to boost handloom exports from the current Rs. 3,000 crores to Rs. 10,000 crore in five years. 
(c) to lift every handloom weaver's family above poverty level. 
(d) to create sustainable employment for at least 10 lakh more people in the handloom sector.
(e) to help handlooms move up the value chain. Necessary fiscal and other support will be given to achieve the above objectives.
2) The end of the Multi-Fibre Agreement and the quota regime in 2005 presents an opportunity to India's textile industry. The Government will assist the industry to reap this opportunity. Specifically,

(a) The powerloom industry will be helped to move up the value chain by upgrading technology, adopting shuttleless looms and becoming integrated textile units.
(b) Units in the mill sector will be enabled to become total textile solution providers. Consolidation and aggregation will be encouraged.
(c) India's strength in being the largest producer of yarn will be innovatively harnessed.
(d) Cotton growers' problems will be comprehensively addressed.
3) A Task Force for Garment Industry will be set up to catalyze a ten-fold increase in investment in making garments for both the domestic and export market. Globally, stitching garments is the fastest way to create medium-skilled jobs, especially jobs for women. India, which is among the most efficient suppliers of yarn, will be made the biggest garment maker in the world by 2009.

Small & Medium Enterprises

1) The focus of our effort will be to facilitate SMEs becoming thriving businesses in a sustainable way, with a strong presence in global markets. Towards this end, we shall enact a SME Development Act and back this up with other regulatory reforms.
2) The Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme will be restructured by lowering its fees to 1% and by increasing the limit to Rs. 50 lakh.
3) A Rs. 1,000 crore Infrastructure Incubation Development Fund will be set up for incubating technocratic entrepreneurs in the SME sector.
4) Strong measures will be initiated, within six months, to put an end to the tyranny of the Inspector Raj, which breeds, corruption, drains the growth potential and demotivates our entrepreneurs in this sector. The cost of complying with regulation, and the time that SSI entrepreneurs have to spend in dealing with government authorities will be reduced to the barest minimum.
Cottage Industries

1) A National Policy on Cottage Industries will be unveiled before the end of 2004. Its focus will be to ensure that this sector, which is crucial from the point of view of poverty alleviation, employment generation and social justice, is placed on a sustainable high-growth path in the fast-changing external environment. Provision of necessary infrastructure and credit support, strong linkages with domestic and export markets, product innovation to meet customer demand, technological upgradation, training and professional management will be comprehensively considered in the new policy.
2) Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) and its affiliate bodies, which have done remarkable work in the past five years, will be given greater support. Specifically, the large network of KVI outlets across the country will be innovatively leveraged to strengthen this sector.
3) In particular, KVIC's Rural Employment Generation Program (REGP) will be fully supported to realize its target of creating 25 lakh additional employment and self-employment opportunities in the next five years.
4) It will be made obligatory for government offices, undertakings and government-supported business establishments to procure a certain percentage of products from the KVIC sector.
5) The "Khadi" brand will be repositioned domestically and popularized globally, in view of the recent success of KVIC's products bearing this name.
6) A "Vishwakarma Initiative" will be launched for craftspersons and rural artisans to preserve their traditional skills and knowledge, upgrade them, and adapt to new challenges. It will especially support the youth in artisan families to bring new technology and management practices to age-old family skills.
Knowledge Economy

The NDA is committed to making India as the Centre of the Knowledge Economy.

1) India's IT industry would be fully supported to reach the goal of $ 50 billion exports by 2008 by consistently moving up the value chain. Advanced IT applications will be encouraged.
2) India has a unique opportunity to become the "back office" service provider to the world. India's opportunity in the Call Centre business and BPO enterprises will be fully harnessed. Comprehensive measures will be taken to rapidly expand employment potential in these IT-enabled services, especially in high-value services that can be rendered by our talented professionals, teachers, doctors, lawyers, managers, accountants, consultants, scientists, etc.
3) Fiscal and policy support will be given to enable India to become a major manufacturer of telecom, IT hardware, and consumer electronics products both for domestic and export markets. Foreign companies will be encouraged to set up fabrication facilities for chips.
4) Government will strengthen support for the biotech industry through a variety of measures, including greater funding for development of world-class R&D capabilities. Besides supporting private R&D projects, greater public-private partnership between industry and academic institutions will be encouraged. The patent regime will be strengthened.
5) Licensing procedure for biotechnology industries will be streamlined and delays in clearances will be eliminated by completely overhauling existing regulatory agencies. There will be a single-point clearance for biotech products, to be issued within sixty days. 
6) An action plan will be prepared to make India a global platform for research, design, and development. The Government will give incentives foreign companies that spend huge amounts on R&D to set up their R&D centers here. Our target is to see that at least 50% of the "Fortune 500" companies have a sizeable part of their R&D facility located in India.
7) The NDA Government is proud that a reversal of "brain drain" -"brain gain" -has started in recent years, for the first time in Independent India. We will convert this "trickle" into a "torrent" by creating attractive conditions for the best Indian talent abroad to return to India or to participate in collaborative work. We will also encourage foreign scientists and professionals to come and work here in big numbers. The time has come to declare India as the land of opportunity for top-order talent in diverse fields.
Science & Technology

The NDA believes that science and technology have a vital role in the success of almost every initiative that figures in this Agenda-from the Second Green Revolution to raising India's social development profile. We are proud that our Government not only checked declining support to India's science and technology establishment, but placed spending on S&T on an upward curve.

1) Our focus in the coming five years will be three-pronged:

(a) further encourage public and private spending on S&T.
(b) further improve the outcome and output of this spending to match global standards.
(c) further integrate the activities and goals of our S&T institutions with India's overarching goal of becoming a Developed Nation by 2020.
2) The Science and Technology Policy will be vigorously implemented.
3) Space research, peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and civilian applications of defense research will be further promoted, building on India's self-reliant strides in these areas. Partnership between CSIR, DRDO, ICAR, ICMR, ISRO, BARC, IITs, universities, and other government-supported research institutions with Indian industry will be speedily expanded. 
4) ISRO's ambitious "Chandrayan" program, which aims to send India's first space mission to the moon before 2008, will be fully supported.
5) Further steps will be taken to remove bureaucratism in the functioning of our S&T institutions. Each of them will be encouraged to develop a bold vision for their future growth to achieve dominance internationally. 
6) Fundamental research in diverse fields will be promoted.
7) Recent efforts to preserve, catalogue, and develop India's indigenous traditions in science and technology will be further encouraged.
8) Efforts at creating a scientific temperament in society, raising popular awareness about science, and promoting the spirit of innovation will be both recognized and supported.
Trade & Commerce

1) Big changes have come about in the global trade environment in the past decade or so. Simultaneously, India's ambition to become a major player in global trade is being matched by growing domestic capability. In response to these two trends, a separate Ministry for International Trade will be created to deal with the challenges and to capture opportunities in global trade in a focused way.
2) Special Economic Zones will be promoted as vehicles for overall growth. An SEZ Promotion Council, with wide industry participation, will be created in the Ministry of Commerce as an apex body.
3) Multi-commodity exchanges-both in the private sector and through-public-private partnerships will be promoted. Our focus here will be to secure for India leading positions in global trade in agricultural commodities, metals, and a wide range of other commodities. 
4) Organized retail trade on the international pattern will be promoted as a new engine of growth for trade and employment through appropriate legal and fiscal measures. 26% FDI in retailing will be allowed. Sourcing of Indian products by foreign retail chains will be encouraged. 
5) India's vast market has potential for generating high growth and thereby reducing poverty and economic inequalities. Internal trade barriers hamper growth. They will be identified and removed.
6) EXIM Bank's capital base will be strengthened to enable it to lend more to exporters.
"Behtar Bazaar Plan"

Bazaar has always been at the center of India's social life and played a crucial role in driving the economy. Removing inefficiencies in our markets from the village haat to wholesale markets in cities and introducing new efficiencies into them will be our priority. The Centre will work closely with State Governments on a time-bound plan of action, to be called "Behtar Bazaar Action Plan", which will include the following initiatives:

(a) Every city and tehsil town in the country will draw up its own "Behtar Bazaar Action Plans", with people's participation, identifying problems and solutions thereof.
(b) Strengthening the connectivity to markets and provision of adequate infrastructure facilities power, water, telecom and IT services, parking lots, etc. and redevelopment/relocation where necessary, will be at the core of these action plans.
(c) HUDCO and commercial banks will be encouraged to fund this initiative, to be implemented through public-private partnerships. For markets that mainly support agriculture and the rural economy, this will be considered priority sector lending.
(d) Traditional trading communities in Indian society, who have a wealth of knowledge and experience in this field, will be suitably encouraged.
Globalization

1) The NDA Government will continue to defend India's interests, especially the interests of our kisans, at the World Trade Organization. Along with other developing countries, we shall work towards restraining developed nations from securing unfair advantages in global trade, investments, agriculture, and services. 
2) The NDA Government will prepare India to take advantage of the big shift that is currently taking place in the global economy. This shift favors a low-cost economy like India's, which has developed sufficient competitive strengths in cost, quality and technology, over high-cost economies in manufacturing and services. Our Government will enlarge these strengths by further reforming our economy, modernizing our infrastructure, enriching India's human resources, and augmenting our capabilities in science and technology.
Housing

The NDA Government remains committed to the goal of "Housing for All by 2010".

1) Encouraged by the success of our program to facilitate construction of twenty lakh additional houses each year, we propose to raise the target to thirty lakh each year. The additional one million houses will be meant exclusively for weaker sections of society.
2) Banks will be encouraged to extend housing loans with low interest rates to rural populations. 
3) A new national program will be launched to enable people with kutcha houses in rural areas to upgrade them into pucca houses. 
4) Cities will be encouraged to take up large-scale mass housing projects for the poor and middle classes. 
5) States will be encouraged to repeal the Urban Land Ceiling Act, amend the Rent Control Act, and reduce stamp duty on property transactions and lease agreements.
6) The stock of rented houses will be vastly increased and renting a house will be made easier by providing a strong, but simple legal framework that protects the interests of both landlords and tenants.
7) Incentives will be given for investments in repairing dilapidated buildings.
Urban Renewal

The Government will launch a major national program for slum improvement and rehabilitation, based on a progressive national policy that harmonizes the basic living and livelihood rights of the urban poor with the imperative of planned urban development. Towards this end, the Valmiki Ambedkar Aawas Yojana (VAMBAY), which has met with enthusiastic response, will be redesigned and its scope will be widened to cover integral development of slum habitations. Innovative ways will be evolved for raising finances, maximizing people's participation, and strengthening the commitment of municipal bodies for the success of this initiative. The long-term aim of this initiative is to make Indian cities slum-free by 2020.

1) Municipal governance will be strengthened.
2) A model central law will be enacted to stop illegal encroachments. States will be encouraged to pass similar legislation.
3) HUDCO's lending for urban renewal projects will be further enhanced. Municipal bodies will be enabled to raise resources from the bond market for their urban renewable needs.
4) The size of the City Challenge Fund will be raised from the present Rs. 500 crore.
5) At least ten Indian cities will be developed as Global Cities, with world-class airports, efficient mass transportation systems, high quality of social infrastructure, vibrant cultural life and a dynamic environment for economic growth with strong global linkages. 
6) The infrastructure and other urban renewal needs of Mumbai, the country's commercial capital, will be addressed.
7) We recognize that municipal bodies have become the weakest link in our system of governance. Also, the problems and needs of big cities have become too complex to be handled in old ways. Therefore, the NDA proposes to elevate municipal corporations in the ten proposed Global Cities to the level of City Governments, within their respective States. These would be vested with requisite financial, judicial, planning, and law-enforcement powers. After evolving a political consensus on this issue, necessary legislative and administrative changes will be introduced.
8) At least twenty new cities and satellite towns will be developed on completely futuristic lines.
9) An Urban Road Development Fund on the lines of the fund for NHDP will be set up. This will fund two hundred flyovers a year in smaller cities and big towns, as well as pedestrian subways and widening of roads.
10) We shall create a state-facilitated, but privately funded and implemented program of urban mass housing for lower and middle classes.
11) The "Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan" program will be redesigned with enlarged scope and enhanced resources to make our cities cleaner. It will be turned into a people's campaign with strong government support at all levels. Adequate number of community toilets, run on the pay-and-use principle, will be constructed within three years in every city. Efficient collection and productive utilization of garbage will be made mandatory. Cities and neighborhoods that demonstrate success stories will be suitably recognized.
Informal Sector

A National Policy for promotion of the Informal Sector will be unveiled before the end of 2004. It will provide livelihood protection to millions of people engaged in this sector, by freeing them from the scourge of extortion and harassment. Legal recognition will be accorded to entrepreneurs and self-employed people in the informal sector and their assets, so that they can enter into contracts, avail bank loans, benefit from various government schemes, and get better market access for their products and services. These and other measures will help them thrive in their myriad occupations, and create more employment opportunities.

Self-help Groups

Self-Help Groups in India are already a big success story. Over 15 lakh SHGs have been formed so far, providing bank-supported micro-finance to their members. Women's SHGs, under the "Swashakti" program, have been particularly successful in increasing family incomes of the rural and urban poor and in advancing the cause of women's economic empowerment. They also have the best record in repaying bank loans.

Building on the experience so far, our Government will prepare an action plan to promote SHGs as a people's movement for participatory economic development. Innovative partnerships between SHGs, NGOs, banks, and markets will created. The private sector will be involved in a big way. Special incentives will be provided for women's SHGs to be formed in every neighborhood. This is possible in a wide variety of occupations such as SHGs of handloom weavers that enable them to access yarn, improve designs, and bypass market intermediaries to get better value for their products; or women's marketing co-operatives in vegetables, fish and other agro-products. Northern States, and in other areas where SHGs are still weak and fewer in number, will be specially targeted.

We will give a formal, legal framework to SHGs. A suitable law, enabling micro-credit operations and nurturing them to be scaled up, will be enacted.

Tourism

An action plan will be prepared within the first six months for developing India as a major tourism destination in the world. One of its important milestones would be to increase foreign tourist arrivals from 30 lakh now to 1 crore by 2009, and 2 crore tourists by 2015. Its other features would be:

1) A strategic marketing plan (such as the "Incredible India!" campaign) with adequate funding will be implemented to achieve a strong India tourism brand. 
2) Higher earnings from tourism from US $ 3 billion at present to US $ 10 billion by 2009.
3) Creation of 1 crore additional employment by 2009, and 2.5 crore by 2015, based on the multiplier effect of tourism on various economic activities.
4) Establishment of five world-class Indian Institutes of Travel and Tourism on the lines of IIMs, with private investment.
5) Visa on arrival; common tourist visa for SAARC countries; simplify visa requirements; reduce visa fees and grant visas within 24 hours.
6) Integrated development of India's 6,000 km-long coastline through cruise and beach tourism.
7) The Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) provisions will be relaxed for tourism and critical urban development projects.
8) Rationalization and simplification of taxes; Tax holidays on large capital investments in tourism.
9) Creation of at least two world-class theme parks based on India's civilizational and spiritual heritage.
10) The North-East will be promoted in a special way to create new tourism destinations for foreign tourists.
Domestic Tourism

A similar focused approach will be adopted for promoting domestic tourism. Every district will be encouraged to prepare a District Tourism Development Plan, harnessing its own unique attractions, setting targets, and offering good infrastructure and affordable amenities. A new thrust will be given to developing adventure tourism and rural tourism. A Pilgrimage Tourism Development Fund will be created to improve infrastructure, amenities, and cleanliness standards at 100 important centers of pilgrimage across the country in five years. Substantial contribution to the fund will come from pilgrims themselves, through a user charge mechanism.

Media and Entertainment

1) The entertainment industry occupies an important place in the cultural and social life of our nation. Its size, reach, recognition, and influence have grown remarkably in recent decadesboth nationally and internationally. The decisions taken by our Government have greatly helped India's film and TV industry in recent years. Both have a huge potential for further growth, including in the area of employment generation. A National Policy for India's Entertainment Industry will be prepared, within six months, to realize its growth potential. 
2) A broad-based committee will be set up to formulate a National Media Policy that would comprehensively address all the complex issues that have emerged in recent years.
Labour

1) The NDA Government has recently unveiled a progressive social security scheme for 37 crore people in the unorganized sector, the first of its kind since Independence. Its speedy and effective implementation will be our priority.
2) We recognize that in a labor-rich society like India, our strategy for achieving 8 to 10% GDP growth rate will have to rest primarily on boosting labor productivity. Therefore, a nationwide program will be launched to raise labor productivity by increasing the percentage of trained manpower in India's workforce from less than 10% at present to at least 50% by 2020 with five-yearly milestones.
3) The working of Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) will be reviewed and necessary steps will be taken for its improvement.
4) Recommendations of the Second Labor Commission will be implemented with necessary modifications to further strengthen welfare, training, and employment creation provisions.
Environment Protection

The NDA views the depletion of India's precious environmental assets with great concern. We believe that sustainable development is possible with the effective protection of all our environmental assets. We shall:

1) Building on the recent achievement in increasing India's forest cover, further measures will be taken to promote afforestation, social forestry and agro forestry. States where depletion has reached critical levels will receive greater attention. Joint Forest Management, which institutionalizes community partnership, will be further strengthened. 
2) Vehicular pollution will be controlled by stringent standards on all motor vehicles at the manufacturing stage itself and by promoting the use of clean fuels.
3) Environment impact assessment of for development projects and industrial clusters will be strengthened.
4) Development of "Green" technologies will be further encouraged. 
5) Regulation of pollution control norms will be decentralized to States and local self-government bodies so that the people suffering from pollution have a say in the mitigation process.
Employment Generation Strategy

The NDA is committed to the goal of eradicating unemployment. Our Government will continue to follow a strategy of accelerated economic growth, which is capable of generating gainful employment for all those who can work. An essential aspect of this strategy is the recognition that the nature of employment generation in India, in line with trends in many other countries, has changed with the changing nature of our economy. Employment generation in government offices and in the capital-intensive segment of industry has a reduced role in this strategy. However, employment and self-employment opportunities are coming up on a large scale in services and in the unorganized sector whose relative weightage in the Indian economy is steadily growing.

This new trend of employment generation is already visible in many parts of India. Many young people are finding jobs and self-employment in different service sectors in not just big cities but also in small towns. These are not jobs in the traditional sense, but they offer opportunities and new challenges for personal growth. Our Government will fully support this trend through necessary policy and institutional measures, including through provision of social security to people in the unorganized sector.

In the NDA's common manifesto in 1999, we had promised to create one crore additional employment and self-employment opportunities each year. This commitment shall continue. We will follow a three-pronged strategy to fulfill this promise:

(a) Sustaining a high GDP growth rate of 8 to 10% yearly; a fast growing economy will create more employment and self-employment opportunities;
(b) Raising the employment-elasticity of the economy by focusing the growth in the employment-generating sectors of the economy;
(c) Enlarging the scope of scope of government schemes that create employment, such as the food-for-work Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana. Such schemes will receive greater budgetary support in 100 backward districts.
As has been indicated in this document, our Government will continue to promote many initiatives that have considerable potential for employment generation for different sections of our society. In rural areas these are: agriculture and agro-processing, wasteland development, agro-forestry, social forestry, dairy, poultry, animal husbandry, agriculture extension services, cottage industries, self-help groups, housing and road construction, transportation, etc.

In urban areas, we will promote employment, self-employment and entrepreneurship opportunities in retail trade, housing and construction, food, transportation, tourism, services in the informal sector, telecom and IT, manufacturing, garments, entertainment, financial services, education and training, etc.

Enhancing the employability of employment-seeking youth, in line with the changing needs and opportunities in the economy will be made a priority. Employment is fundamentally linked with education. Therefore, we have affirmed our commitment to carry out a major overhaul of our school and college education. Training in skills will begin in secondary schools. When a student matriculates, she/he will have acquired some job-oriented skills. The University Grants Commission is redesigning college curriculum to enable students to have greater flexibility in the choice of subjects and pursue multiple job-oriented diploma courses simultaneously. Colleges will be encouraged to offer-singly or collaboratively-a variety of subjects and courses in areas that need skilled manpower.

There are as many as 2,800 diverse trades in India, each requiring a sound domain knowledge and good skills. Knowledge and skills in these can be upgraded in a scalable fashion through IT-based distance learning, television, and broadband internet connectivity. Our Government will promote these new technologies in affordable ways. We will encourage creation of educational content in local languages to be used on these platforms. We will also promote new well-regulated certification mechanisms. We will give incentives to the private sector to participate in job-oriented education and training in a big way-both in urban as well as in rural areas. There would be no age barriers to admissions for pursuing these courses. We are confident that all these new initiatives would touch the lives of millions of our young women and men, raise their skills and productivity, provide them with fulfilling employment opportunities and improve the quality of products and services in India beyond recognition.

Economic Reforms

1) The tax to GDP ratio will be improved through further widening and deepening of the tax base.
2) Rationalization and simplification of tariffs and removal of most exemptions within two years.
3) States will be given incentives to switch over to VAT. The Centre will ensure a hassle-free transition to the new tax regime, especially for small traders and businesses.
4) Tax evasion and corruption will be reduced through administrative measures and end-to-end computerization of the entire tax system. All shops and commercial establishments will be encouraged, through appropriate incentives, to make their transactions computer-based in three years.
5) There shall be a single destination to electronically pay all taxes and regulatory charges-whether Central, State, or local-for all classes of business.
6) Pension reforms will be speeded up. The Pension Regulator shall be mandated to come up with a scheme that creates an individual but portable pension-fund account for all workers, whether in the private sector or in the public sector, in the organized or in the unorganized sector.
Financial Sector Reforms

1) All currently proposed financial sector reforms in banking, insurance, foreign investment, and capital markets will be completed within the next six months.
2) The principal aim of reforms in the banking sector will be to bring efficient banking services to the doorstep of every customer. To achieve this, greater competition will be created by extending the reach of PSU banks and expanding the activities of private banks.
3) Consolidation of PSU banks will be encouraged.
4) Indian banks will be encouraged to enlarge their footprint overseas.
5) The role of development banks and financial institutions will be enlarged to provide necessary funds for projects. 
6) The reach of insurance will be considerably enhanced in the next five years.
7) FDI limit in insurance will be revisited to further widen India's insurance sector, and to strengthen its global linkages.
8) We will take steps to make it easy for smaller firms to raise moneys from the stockmarkets as well as for small investors, especially from smaller towns to invest in the stock market. We shall double the number of individuals who own shares in the next five years.
State Finances

1) Restructuring of debts by State governments will be further encouraged and pursued. 
2) States will be encouraged to carry out fiscal reforms and to reduce revenue deficit in every State to zero by 2006.
3) Political consensus will be evolved to reduce unproductive expenditure and enhance States' own resource mobilization.
Balanced Development

1) A Monitoring Committee for Elimination of Regional Disparities will be set up to focus on developmental imbalances between and within States. 
2) Accelerating economic growth and all-round social development in the northern and eastern States, where a majority of India's population lives, will be our priority in the coming years. 
3) Additional, dedicated budgetary resources will be provided for faster development of backward areas in each state.
Social Justice And Empowerment

1) A Monitoring Committee for Elimination of Social Disparities will be set up to focus on social and economic justice for SCs, STs, OBCs, denotified and nomadic tribes, and the poor among forward classes and minorities. States will be encouraged to set up similar committees. 
2) A National Tribal Policy will be enunciated for the all-round socio-economic development of our vanvasi brethren. 
3) Regularization of land rights of tribals living on forest land and promotion of their livelihood activities based on forest produce, if necessary by suitable amendments in the forest laws.
4) Provisions of the policy on reservations will be strictly implemented. A major drive will be launched for filling up all backlogs in jobs and promotions for SCs and STs. Private sector enterprises will be given incentives for creating more educational, training, employment and entrepreneurship opportunities for SCs and STs.
5) Functioning of various Commissions and Finance Corporations for the development of SCs and STs will be improved.
6) Laws to check atrocities against SCs, STs, and other weaker sections will be strictly enforced.
7) The newly announced Commission for Nomadic and Denotified Tribes will be made operational. 
8) Reservations for the poor among "Forward Classes" will be introduced after receiving recommendations of the Commission set up for this purpose. 
9) Special encouragement will be given for preservation of the artistic and cultural traditions of SCs and STs, and for honoring their heroes.
Minorities

1) A Minorities Development Agenda will be unveiled within the first six months to focus on a 3-E program: Education, Economic upliftment, and Empowerment. 
2) The Agenda will especially address the needs of those belonging to poor and backward families, ensuring that they get an equitable share in government-supported schemes in education, housing, etc. 
3) The working of the Minorities Commission will be reoriented to address their developmental and welfare issues.
4) The NDA Government gave unprecedented encouragement to the promotion of Urdu language and to the modernization of Madarasa education. This will continue.
5) A concerted effort will be made to increase minorities' representation in administration and public bodies.
Social Development

Our goal in Social Development will be to bring about all-sided improvement in the quality of life of all Indians by fulfilling the basic needs of every citizen in education, healthcare, nutrition, drinking water, housing, sanitation, and cultural development.

To achieve this overarching objective, and to reverse the previous trend of inadequate investment in this sector, the Government will create a special "Social Development Fund" of Rs. 100,000 crore to be invested over five years.

Education for All

1) Total spending on education will be raised to 6% of the GDP in five years, with enlarged public-private partnership at every level of the educational pyramid.
2) Literacy rate of 85% will be achieved in five years. Our vision is to see that Indian society becomes fully literate by 2015. For this, we will launch a multi-pronged campaign to ensure that every child goes to school, every school is made accountable to the community, and every village and town is made accountable for its quality education status. Appropriate resources both from Government and non-government sources will be mobilized to match our ambitious goals. Innovative tools like computer-based and TV-promoted functional literacy will be employed. The 'Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan' will be made into a people's movement.
3) Spread of education among SCs, STs, OBCs, and minorities, and activities aimed at removing gender disparities in education at all levels, will receive increased support.
4) A special fund of Rs. 1,000 crore a year will be created, partially through a cess on all non-needy students, to improve all primary school buildings in rural areas in five years.
5) "Akshaya Patra", as a national mid-day meal program, will be made operational.
6) The entire school and college education system will be overhauled and made employment-oriented. Opportunities for skill development and vocational training will be maximized.
7) A Standards Improvement Campaign, to be named after Dr. Syama Prasad Mookherjee (who became the youngest ever vice-chancellor of the prestigious Calcutta University), will be launched to raise the quality of education in colleges and universities. Institutions that perform well will be suitably recognized.
8) No student would be deprived of access to higher education for lack of resources. Scholarships and soft loans would be made widely available to all needy students. A National Education Development Fund will be established for this purpose. 
9) While encouraging private investment, effective steps will be taken to curb commercialization of education. 
10) The focus on Indian culture, heritage, and ethical values in syllabi will be strengthened. Character-building and all-round development of the student's personality will be emphasized. Sports, physical training, and social service will be mainstreamed into the educational system.
11) The growing de-emphasis of Bharatiya languages in school and college education will be checked. Teaching in the mother tongue will be encouraged. 
12) Efforts will be intensified for the propagation of Sanskrit.
13) Establishment of hostels, especially for women's education, will be encouraged. 
14) Administration of our educational institutions will be freed of bureacratism. Community participation in managing their activities and monitoring their performance will be encouraged.
15) Centers of excellence in higher education are India's pride. They will have requisite autonomy to become the best in the world.
16) Five new IITs will be established before 2005. 
17) Our vision is to make India a global hub for higher education and regain the glory of the Nalanda era. For this, an action plan will be prepared to elevate at least 25 Indian universities and 100 colleges to international standards in every respect. All our IITs, NITs, IIMs, IIScs, AIIMS-like medical institutes, and other reputed higher educational institutions (both existing and proposed) will be further supported. Public-private participation will be fully activated to realize the above vision, which would not only raise India's stature globally but also enable our country to earn significant foreign exchange.
Health for All

For the NDA, "Health For All" is not a mere slogan. It is our avowed objective, a cherished goal; indeed, a commitment to our people, which we will strive to fulfill. Access to affordable healthcare is a basic need, which must be provided for.

1) Total public spending on healthcare at present is 2% of the GDP. This figure will doubled in the next five years. Our Government has already taken an important step in this direction by setting up the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, which is co-chaired by the Finance Minister and the Minister of Health and Family Welfare. Investment by the private sector, including by NRIs, for providing healthcare in India will be encouraged. Public-private partnerships will be enhanced.
2) We will implement in a time-bound manner the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana under which six new hospitals on the pattern of All-India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi are being set up in fix under-served states and six existing hospitals in other states are being upgraded to the level of AIIMS. This is a part of our commitment to provide affordable super-specialty healthcare to the needy in different parts of the country, within or near their own states. 
3) An insurance-based health security scheme, called Antyodaya Swasthya Yojana, will be started to cover two crore poorest among the BPL families, who are currently beneficiaries of the Antyodaya Anna Yojana. 
4) We will strive towards zero incidence of polio by the end of 2004 and for keeping this zero status for the next three years, so that India can be certified polio free by 2007. 
5) The National TB Control Program will cover the entire population by the end of next year. Sufficient funds will be allocated for this purpose.
6) All efforts will be made for the eradication of filariasis within five years. 
7) We will revitalize the existing Primary Healthcare system in coordination with the state governments. Linkages between safe drinking water, sanitation, nutrition, family welfare services, women and child services, and primary education will be strengthened through appropriate coordination mechanisms at the Central, State, and village levels.
8) The Government will set up a Rs. 1,000 crore fund, through public-private partnerships, to improve the infrastructure of primary healthcare centers in backward areas.
9) Infant and maternal mortality levels will be reduced by half. The newly launched "Vande Mataram" scheme of gynecologists in private practice for care of pregnant women will be strengthened. The "Janani Suraksha Yojana," already envisaged by us, will be implemented with the aim of establishing linkages between a health center and the mother-to-be. To meet the expectation of the nutrition of the mother, a sum of Rs. 500 will be given to her after the birth of a baby boy and Rs. 1,000 for a baby girl. 
10) The "Save the Girl Child" campaign will be further popularized.
11) The spread of HIV/AIDS will be checked on a war footing. Care and support for AIDS patients will be undertaken hand-in-hand with efforts for the prevention of the disease.
12) We are committed towards strengthening the National Programs on malaria, blindness, leprosy, and mental health. 
13) The ageing population needs special care. The government hospitals will have special facilities for healthcare of senior citizens.
14) We will promote our traditional systems of medicine, namely Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Yoga, and Naturopathy, as also homeopathy. Different systems will be synergized in the delivery of healthcare and in medical education. 
15) We will encourage the production and exports of pharmaceutical products from India, including Ayurvedic and herbal products.
16) The nearly six lakh providers of traditional medical services in villages have remained unrecognized and unsupported, in spite of catering to the needs of those sections of our population, which are underserved by the formal system. They will be suitably assisted to play a bigger and more effective role in improving the health profile of the rural poor.
17) Working of regulatory bodies , which oversee medical education in the country, will be reviewed to improve standards.
18) We shall make India a preferred global destination for healthcare. Our large reservoirs of skilled doctors, nurses, and other paramedical staff along with the state-of-the-art facilities in our hospitals have a huge potential, which will be nurtured and realized in the next five years. Simultaneously, steps will be taken to improve the standards of excellence in medical education, nursing, and other areas. An Action Plan will be drawn up before end of 2004 to pursue this goal, with suitable encouragement to the private sector. 
19) The menace of spurious drugs shall be controlled. 
20) A mass movement will be launched for increasing awareness about health issues and making citizens take good care of themselves by cultivating healthy habits and lifestyles; towards this end, a strong physical and sports culture will be promoted among people of all age-groups.
Food Security

1) Coverage of the "Antyodaya Anna Yojana" (which provides wheat at Rs. 2 a kg and rice at Rs. 3 a kg) will be will be increased from 2 crore to 5 crore poorest families in five years. Its implementation will be decentralized. 
2) All beneficiaries under this scheme will be given an "Antodaya Card" that would also entitle them to Health Security, Social Security, Shelter Security, Educational Guarantee, and priority attention in government offices and police stations.
3) A well-run supply chain involving the private traders, community, and Panchayats will be established to ensure food availability in normal times as well as during natural calamities. 
4) The public distribution system would be revamped with people's participation to make it efficient and accountable. It would also be used to deliver other goods and services.
Women's Empowerment

1) A National Policy on Women's Economic Empowerment will be unveiled before end of 2004. It will aim at ensuring that every woman has some means of livelihood and, additionally, at enhancing the incomes of all categories of working women. It will propose strategies to enable women in balancing work and family by introducing a national childcare plan, workplace flexibility, greater career opportunities, hostels for working women in every town, and removal of gender disparities in education, wages, and property rights. 
2) Support for programs like "Swavalamban" and STEP (Support to Training and Employment Program for Women), which promote self-employment and entrepreneurship for needy women, will be greatly enhanced. Technical and management services for those engaged in handicrafts, food processing, handloom, garments, etc., will be strengthened. Added focus will be provided for implementing these programs in the North East, J&K, and areas affected by left-wing extremism.
3) Enterprises promoted by women, or employing a large number of women, will be given "fast track" facilitation.
4) Laws to check female foeticide, dowry, child marriage, trafficking, rape and family violence will be strictly enforced. Societal efforts to curb these ills will be encouraged.
5) Support for the Swadhaar program and Women Helplines for abandoned widows, victims of trafficking, mentally challenged women, and victims of calamities will be greatly expanded with private and philanthropic participation.
6) The Bill for 33% reservation for women in Parliament and State Legislatures will be introduced in the very first session of Parliament. The NDA will work for speedy passage of this progressive legislation based on a consensus.
Care of the Disabled

Disabled people constitute about 5% of India's population. Years of neglect have delayed their large-scale integration into the social mainstream. Their welfare and rehabilitation is integral to our vision of a caring society and a responsive government. The newly-established Commission for the Disabled will draw up a Charter for the Disabled, which will have the following points:

1) Ensure and implement the right for education and vocational training for the disabled.
2) Ensure disabled-friendly access to public utilities, public buildings, and transports.
3) Ensure maximum economic independence of the disabled by creating more income generation models for the disabled.
4) Facilitate establishment of an Institute of Vocational Training for the Disabled in every district with public-private partnership.
5) Provide special incentive for the adoption of a disabled child.
6) Voluntary organizations working for the care of the disabled will be fully supported.
This charter will be implemented.
Children

The NDA is committed to securing a bright future for India's children. A National Commission for Children will be set up to comprehensively address the issues of education, healthcare, nutrition, recreation, removal of gender disparities, elimination of child labor, integrated care and rehabilitation of orphans and street children, etc. It will put the aspirations and rights of children at the heart of our development agenda.

The Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS), the world's largest early childcare programme, will be further strengthened. Its implementation will be communitised.

Youth

India, an ancient civilization, has become a young nation demographically. 65% of our population is below 35 years. These young men and women have soaring aspirations for themselves and a burning desire to see India emerge as a strong and prosperous country. The NDA commits itself to helping our youth realize their dreams.

1) We shall strive for "Education for All" and "Employment for All".
2) We shall strive to create an environment in which young Indians find many avenues to contribute to nation-building and to their own all-round development.
3) The National Cadet Corps shall be strengthened. The National Service Scheme shall be made more innovative to nurture the spirit of voluntary service among the youth. Encouragement for talented youth in arts and other cultural pursuits will be stepped up. 
4) We will promote the Youth Hostel movement by facilitating the construction of new youth hostels in major cities and tourist centers, with private sector participation.
5) Recommendations of the National Youth Commission will be given serious consideration.
Sports

The NDA Government aims to make India a major sports power in the world.

1) Towards this end, the Prime Minister's Ten-Point Program for the Development of Sports will be vigorously implemented. 
2) A National Sports Development Fund will be set up with a yearly allocation of Rs. 500 crore. Citizens and business houses will be encouraged to contribute to it. 
3) A Rashtriya Khel Rozgar Yojana will be launched to encourage talented sportspersons to set up sports clubs, gymnasiums, and training centres, thereby creating employment and self-employment opportunities.
4) Greater support will be provided for the promotion of traditional Indian sports and rural transports.
Senior Citizens

Respect for elders has always been at the center of India's social traditions and cultural ethos. Being repositories of knowledge and experience, they are a precious asset to society. However, they have been facing many problems with rapid urbanization and changes in the traditional joint families. Our Government will set up a National Commission for Senior Citizens to comprehensively address their needs, problems and potential to further contribute to the nation's development.

Population Control

1) A people's movement will be launched to realize the goals and targets set in the National Population Policy. It will particularly focus on those States that are lagging behind
2) The Government will introduce a set of non-coercive disincentives for a two-child norm, and incentives for a girl child. The two-child norm will be made a qualification, on a prospective basis, for contesting any election.
Governance Reforms

The NDA Government will unveil, before the end of 2004, comprehensive Good Governance Reforms, which will focus on:

1) Administrative reforms to check corruption, promote transparency and accountability, remove delays in decision-making; and to make government employees treat the people as their masters.
2) Electoral reforms to check the unhealthy influence of money power and prevent criminalization of politics.
3) Judicial reforms for speedy and affordable justice.
4) Political reforms to raise the standards and efficacy of Parliament, State Legislatures, and other elected bodies.
5) Reform of ministries to speed up decision making and develop better capabilities for policy formulation and implementation.
6) Good Corporate Governance reforms to ensure lawful and ethical business practices, protection of shareholders' interests, and consumer protection.
Judicial Reforms

1) A Rs. 1,000-crore Fund for Modernization of Courts will be set up to improve the physical and operational infrastructure of courts. This will receive partial contribution from the legal community. Judicial officers will be empowered to involve the community in improving the facilities in a transparent manner.
2) The number of courts and the number of judges will be doubled in five years for quicker judicial process.
3) A separate class of courts will be set up for cases involving specified commercial laws such as the Contract Act, Negotiable Instruments Act, and other business laws. These would deliver quicker justice to aggrieved businesses, and would be partly funded by charging both litigants a "Fast Track" fee.
4) Reform of the criminal justice system to make dispensation of justice simpler, quicker, and more effective.
5) Courts all over the country will be computerized and networked for improving their efficiency.
6) Extension of Fast-Track Courts to all layers of the judiciary.
7) Expansion of alternative dispute redressal mechanisms through Lok Adalats and Tribunals.
8) Setting up a National Judicial Commission for appointment of judges and ensuring judicial ethics.
9) A Judicial Procedural Reforms Committee will suggest, within six months, how to halve the time taken to conduct every trial, civil or criminal. The aim would be to ensure that three-fourths of all court cases are completed in twelve months. 
10) The number of cases in which the Government is a litigant will be halved in the next three years.
Administrative, Police, Civil Service and other Reforms

1) An Administrative Procedural Reforms Commitee will suggest, within six months, how to eliminate unnecessary procedures and simplify others. Efficiency, accountability, responsiveness, and a pro-poor attitude will be the hallmark of the administrative system in the years to come.
2) The Civil Service, the steel frame of India's administrative system, would be reformed and strengthened. New cadre system and modern service code will be adopted to enable professionalism at all levels of administration. Senior officers will be suitably empowered to take timely and bold decisions. Responsibility and accountability will be fixed for fulfillment of goals and targets. Officers will be allowed to work in the private sector. Similarly, lateral entry of talented professionals from the private sector at senior levels will be encouraged. 
3) Discretionary powers vested with public authorities will be reduced. Objective criteria will be laid down for the exercise of such powers. 
4) Delays in environmental clearance for development projects will be removed. It will be mandatory for authorities to clear or reject a proposal within 45 days.
5) A Fund for Modernization of District and Sub-District Administration will be set up for better office amenities and public interface; computerization, communication, and networking; better grievance redressal mechanism; and mobility to enable improved outreach to the public. Administration will be empowered to raise resources from the local community and to involve it in improving the amenities in a transparent manner.
6) The Planning Commission will be reformed and reorganized in light of the changing developmental needs of our country. 
7) In order to improve efficiency of budgetary resources and public assets, we will work towards convergence of Centrally sponsored schemes, transfer of certain schemes to States based on suitability.
Electoral Reforms

1) Consensus will be evolved to prevent entry of criminal elements into politics. 
2) In cooperation with all political parties, the NDA will work towards raising the standards of Parliament and State Legislatures.
3) A National Institute for Training Elected Representatives will be established.
India to be ruled by Indians

Legislation will be introduced to ensure that important offices of the Indian State can be occupied only by those who are India's natural citizens by their Indian origin.

Centre-State Relations

The NDA Government's achievement in this regard can be judged by the fact that Centre-State relations are no longer a subject of political debate. They are marked by harmony and cooperation, which were sadly missing in previous decades. Our Government has not discriminated against any State on political grounds. This shall continue to be our approach in the coming five years. On the issue of Article 356 of the Constitution, we remain committed to the consensus reached at the Inter-State Council meeting in Srinagar in 2003.

Empowerment of Panchayats

1) The NDA Government will work for effective financial and administrative empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies in respect of three Fs: "Funds", "Functions", and "Functionaries". Suitable judicial, executive, financial, and geographical layout planning powers will be devolved to these bodies. The Constitution would be amended for this purpose.
2) The institution of the Gram Sabha will be strengthened to discuss every developmental work, scrutinize the allocation and spending of funds, and evaluate the performance of panchayat and government functionaries.
Cultural and Spiritual Heritage

1) Ours was the first government to launch national missions for the preservation of manuscript s, monuments, and other facets of India's cultural, artistic and spiritual heritage. States will be encouraged to set up similar missions. Every town will prepare a heritage conservation mission. These will be effectively implemented, with extensive participation of communities, business houses, professional bodies, and NGOs.
2) Support for expanding India's cultural relations with all countries in the world will be considerably enhanced, with private participation.
3) A National Commission for promotion of Bharatiya languages will be established. It will make a comprehensive study of the challenges before our Bharatiya languages in the modern era and recommend tasks for their consistent development.
4) Upkeep of places of spiritual importance.
Civil Society Empowerment

1) The NDA recognizes that maximizing people's participation in the implementation of all policies and programs of the government is the key to India's rapid and all-round development. Towards this end, a National Council of Voluntary Organizations will be set up. States will be encouraged to establish similar Councils.
2) Involvement of religious establishments of all denominations, which are active in the social field, will be encouraged in areas like mass-feeding for the poor, care of orphans and destitutes, campaign against social evils like female foeticide, environmental protection, etc. 
3) Civil Society will be suitably empowered to help in achieving dispute resolutionranging from local disputes over minor issues to major ones over contentious issuesoutside the realm of the judiciary and government. Its cooperation will be sought in strengthening civic discipline, adherence to law, tax compliance, and care for public property.

National Security

The NDA Government took historic initiatives in the last six years to strengthen India's defense capability and preparedness. We pledge to carry forward this imperative. Our priorities will be:

1) Speedy implementation of all the current programs for modernization, acquisition, and capability enhancement; 
2) Making operational the Rs. 25,000-crore Defense Modernization Fund, which was announced in the Interim Budget;
3) Minimizing delays and procedural bottlenecks, which push up costs and cause obsolescence;
4) Achieving greater efficiency in defense spending; giving a further boost to indigenization of defense production and encouragement to private sector participation; and making defense exports a thrust area. 
5) In addition, the Government will continue to further augment welfare measures for ex-servicemen and war widows. We shall create adequate opportunities for retired officers to contribute to development activities where they can put their skills and training to productive use. Necessary measures will be taken to make service in the Armed Forces an attractive career option for the educated Indian youth.
Internal Security

1) Cross-border terrorism will be eliminated. 
2) There has been a significant reduction of communal and caste violence in the past five years. Our government shall further strengthen and stabilize this trend, and work towards realizing our vision of a riot-free India. 
3) Ongoing programs for modernization of our police and paramilitary forces will be intensified. 
4) We will build political consensus to enact a Central law, and constitute a federal agency to deal with federal crimes.
5) The multi-pronged strategy to eliminate the growing menace of left-wing extremism, which extends from the Nepal border to Andhra Pradesh, will be more effectively implemented. The Government will encourage the misguided youth who have joined various naxal organizations to give up the path of violence. Development activities in affected areas will be intensified, with people's participation. 
6) The long pending police reforms will be taken up to synchronize with the ongoing scheme for modernization of state police forces. Investigation functions would be separated from law & order functions. Number of police stations will be doubled over the next five years. Mobile police stations, better communications, community friendly approach, highway police stations, better public interface and independence of police will be established through necessary legal and executive means. Partnership between police and community will be institutionalized. Police and security forces will be made more people-friendly, and more sensitive towards the grievances of the poor, weaker sections of society, and women.
Jammu & Kashmir

Building on the positive turnaround in the situation in Jammu & Kashmir, the NDA Government will continue its efforts to eliminate terrorism and further strengthen the Centre's cooperation with the State government to consolidate peace, normalcy and development in the State.

Together with the State Government, efforts will be made to ensure early return of Kashmiri Pandits and other displaced people to their native places.

The NDA Government will work for balanced development of all the three regions of the State- Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. To ensure this, steps will be taken, based on consensus, for:

1) Autonomous Regional Councils for Jammu and Ladakh with adequate financial and administrative powers;
2) Protection of the original demographic identity of the three regions.
3) Equitable distribution of funds from the Centre.
North-East

The NDA Government has given unprecedented attention to the development of the North-Eastern States in the last five years. These gains will be consolidated and placed on a stable footing. Our priorities in the coming five years would be:

1) Restoration of peace and normalcy in all the disturbed regions by dialogue with all groups who are willing to give up the path of violence, and by firmly dealing with those who continue on this path.
2) Ensuring that the ethnic identities of all the people in the North-East are protected.
3) Repeal of the IMDT Act for putting an end to infiltration from Bangladesh.
4) Accelerating economic development that provides growth opportunities to all.
5) Development of the communication infrastructure to overcome the constraints of physical distance.
6) Making all Indians more aware of the rich history and cultural heritage of our North-Eastern States, including Sikkim.
7) Expanding regional economic cooperation with countries in our eastern neighborhood and in South-East Asia.
Other Commitments

1) The NDA Government shall continue to strengthen the ideal of secularism enshrined in India's Constitution.
2) The NDA believes that an early and amicable resolution of the Ayodhya issue will strengthen national integration. We continue to hold that the judiciary's verdict in this matter should be accepted by all. At the same time, efforts should be intensified for dialogue and a negotiated settlement in an atmosphere of mutual trust and goodwill.
3) Our Government will create a "National Integration Quota" of 2% for students from Jammu & Kashmir, North-East, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Lakshwadeep Islands in educational institutions across the country.
4) A National Disaster Prevention and Management Authority will be set up, with a fund of Rs. 1,000 crore. States will be encouraged to set up similar authorities. 
5) The Government will implement decisions taken at the last meeting of the Island Development Authority, and will continue to attend to the needs of the people of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshwadeep Islands.
6) Consumer protection movement will be further strengthened.
7) The NDA government is committed to giving corruption-free governance at all levels.
India and the World

India's aim in foreign policy has always been to secure for itself a steadily broadening role in international affairs, so that we can contribute meaningfully to the global community's collective ability to deal with the challenges of today and tomorrow. The NDA Government is proud of its foreign policy achievements in the last five years. We will build on these successes to focus on the following objectives in the coming five years.

1) Continue the dialogue process with Pakistan for a lasting solution to all the outstanding issues, including Jammu & Kashmir, on the basis of the Joint Statement issued in Islamabad in February 2004.
2) Further strengthen the SAARC process; implement free-trade in South Asia; and work towards realizing the vision for a South Asian Economic Union with a common currency for the region.
3) Further strengthen our Look-East Policy to deepen the India-ASEAN relationship; initiate the BIMST-EC process; activate the Mekong-Ganga cooperation initiative; deepen our economic cooperation with Koreas; and enrich our strategic partnership with Japan.
4) Further consolidate our strategic partnership with Russia, with a stronger underpinning of economic cooperation.
5) Broaden and deepen our multi-dimensional relations with USA. 
6) Expand our economic cooperation with China. Continue the dialogue process with China to achieve a mutually satisfactory resolution of the boundary issue, which is an objective of strategic interest for us.
7) Intensify our cooperation with the European Union. 
8) Rejuvenate our traditional bonds with countries in West Asia;
9) Reestablish our age-old ties with countries in Central Asia;
10) Develop extensive relations with all countries in Africa, Central America, Latin America, and Pacific Ocean countries like Australia, New Zealand, Fiji, etc.
Energy security will continue to be a key objective of our foreign policy. Therefore, we will intensify our efforts to establish suitable alliances to secure access to new energy sources around the world.

The NDA Government envisions a future that rests on a cooperative multipolar world order, with India as one of the poles.

We will continue our efforts to secure permanent membership of the UN Security Council.

The NDA is proud of the shining achievements of NRIs and PIOs around the world. We attach great strategic importance to strengthening India's multi-dimensional links with the Diaspora Community. Our Government took many historic initiatives in this direction in the last five years for example, granting dual citizenship to PIOs from a select group of countries. Our commitment to this deeply cherished cause will continue.

Conclusion

In our common Agenda for elections in 1999, we had said, "The NDA came into being because of an historic need and realization amongst us that our young democracy cannot bear the fits and tremors of frequent elections, which will undermine the people's faith in the democratic process." That phase of instability is now history. The NDA has taken India into a new orbit of accelerated development, coupled with peace on our borders and harmony within.

As we seek a renewed and bigger mandate in 2004, we ask to be judged by our performance in the last five years as well as by the vision and programme that we have laid out in this Agenda. We are proud to have raised the bar of performance higher, and are keenly aware that the Indian voter now expects more.

We believe in the principle of accountability. We promise to give a six-monthly report on the status of implementation of the commitments made in this Agenda.

Prime Minister Shri. Atal Bihari Vajpayee has placed an energizing vision of India as a Developed Nation. The NDA rededicates itself to realizing this vision in partnership with the people of India.
a
about
above
after
again
against
all
am
an
and
any
are
aren't
as
at
be
because
been
before
being
below
between
both
but
by
can't
cannot
could
couldn't
did
didn't
do
does
doesn't
doing
don't
down
during
each
few
for
from
further
had
hadn't
has
hasn't
have
haven't
having
he
he'd
he'll
he's
her
here
here's
hers
herself
him
himself
his
how
how's
i
i'd
i'll
i'm
i've
if
in
into
is
isn't
it
it's
its
itself
let's
me
more
most
mustn't
my
myself
no
nor
not
of
off
on
once
only
or
other
ought
our
ours
ourselves
out
over
own
same
shan't
she
she'd
she'll
she's
should
shouldn't
so
some
such
than
that
that's
the
their
theirs
them
themselves
then
there
there's
these
they
they'd
they'll
they're
they've
this
those
through
to
too
under
until
up
very
was
wasn't
we
we'd
we'll
we're
we've
were
weren't
what
what's
when
when's
where
where's
which
while
who
who's
whom
why
why's
with
won't
would
wouldn't
you
you'd
you'll
you're
you've
your
yours
yourself
yourselves
Telugu Desam Party

The Backdrop
Andhra Pradesh – Fastest Mover State
International role model TDP’s goal
   - Swarna Andhra Pradesh by 2020
   Bold vision and determined action
   TDP: Total Development Party
   NTR formed TDP to restore Telugu Pride
   Society is our temple
   Poor people our Gods
   Good governance is good politics
   Our Vision

   “Our vision of Andhra Pradesh is a state where poverty is totally eradicated; where every man, woman and child has access to not just the basic minimum needs, but to all the opportunities to lead a happy and fulfilling life; a knowledge and learning society built on the values of hard work, honesty, discipline and a collective sense of purpose.”
   Andhra Pradesh Vision 2020 

   Report Card
   Power - 5169 MWs added
   Irrigation - 12.42 lakh acres additional ayacut, 17.59 lakh acres gap ayacut
   Agriculture - Productivity increases
   Poverty - One of the lowest in India
   Literacy - Highest increase for women
   Population growth - 10.5% reduction
   Investments - From 23rd to 2nd position
   Public Sector - Singareni from loss to profit
   Information Technology - Hyderabad major IT hub
   DWCRA - 4.75 lakh groups, 65.4 lakh members
   Thrust Areas
   Growth engines
   Rural economy
   Agriculture
   Irrigation
   Poverty reduction
   Human resources development
   Technology
   Swarna gramam / nagaram
   Janmabhoomi and Self Help
   Local bodies
   Women’s empowerment
   Weaker Section
   Youth empowerment
   Peace and prosperity
   High standards in politics
   Good governance
   Agriculture
   Rs.10,000 crores
   Price stabilization: Rs.200 crores
   Rythu Mitra: 4% interest rate
   Modernisation / Mechanisation
   Drought proofing
   Research stations / Quality control labs
   Agro Processing and export zones
   State Agriculture Commission
   Agriculture - Allied
   Vision 2020 growth engines
   Dairy, meat, poultry – First position
   Fisheries and fish exports
   Horticulture
   Floriculture
   Sericulture Food parks and food processing clusters
   Irrigation
   Rs. 30,000 crores
   3000 TMC of Godavari water going waste
   Polavaram and Ichampalli as National projects
   New irrigation potential of 25 lakh acres 28 lakh acres additional because of Micro irrigation
   Neeru – Meeru
   Rural Amenities
   Rs. 4000 crores – rural water supply
   Focus on fluoride and arsenic affected habitations
   Latrines: individual / community / schools
   CC roads in all habitations
   Tar roads linking all villages
   Providing urban amenities in rural areas
   Urban development
   Basic amenities for all slums
   10 lakh BPL families to be brought above poverty line
   Amenities
   Water Supply schemes
   Urban transport
   Parks, play grounds
   Clean and green cities
   Education
   100% literacy by 2006
   Free compulsory education upto 15 years
   Access to education
   Primary School within 1 km
   Upper Primary School within 3 km
   High School within 5 km
   Junior College in each Mandal
   Eradication of child labour
   Vocation training for 4 lakh students
   IIT - Basra
   Health
   Rs 12,890 crores
   Population stabilization by 2010
   Maternal mortality 0.5, child mortality 15
   100% immunization and eradication of blindness
   Medical college/Speciality Hospital in each district
   Trauma care centers on National Highways
   Mobile Health Brigades
   Telemedicine
   Housing
   House site and houses for all houseless poor
   Better architecture
   New technologies
   Women’s Empowerment
   Reservations 33.33%
   40 lakh gas connections under Deepam
   Sales tax exemption
   Mahila Banks
   Rs 7,500 crores corpus for DWCRA Groups
   Minimum Rs 2,500 monthly income
   40 lakh DWCRA/DWCUA families to be brought above poverty line
   Marketing of DWCRA products
   Girl child protection scheme for 1 girl child in BPL families.
   Youth and Employment
   Rs 1000 crores
   50 lakh self employment and employment in service sector
   Incubators in Universities
   Institutional loans at 4%
   Sports facilities
   Youth Commission
   Poverty
   30 lakh BPL families in rural areas to be brought above poverty line
   10 lakh in urban areas
   Complete eradication of poverty in 10 years
   SC Welfare
   7.5 lakh beneficiaries
   73 small, 15 medium and 6 mega industrial parks
   Rs 1000 crores for 5.5 lakh SC families
   3.5 lakh students in residential schools (1.77 lakhs at present)
   Upgradation of existing schools into residential schools
   Focus on education and employment
   ST Welfare
   Every Girijan tanda to be a tribal sub-plan village
   Every tanda with 500 population to be a gram panchayat
   Reservations as per 2001 census
   Rs 445 crores to cover 2.8 lakh STs
   Existing hostels for tribals to be doubled
   16 hydel power projects to tribal DWCRA mahila
   BC Welfare
   Modern technology/skills
   Carpenters, goldsmiths, blacksmiths, potters and other artisans
   7.4 lakh BC families to be covered under self employment
   Maramaggalu
   Handloom and handicraft bazaars
   Financial assistance to artisans who die accidentally/ handicapped
   4% interest rates
   Minorities
   1.55 lakh beneficiaries, Rs 150 crores
   Assistance for education and training
   2 residential schools in each district
   Urdu Ghar / Shadikhana
   Disabled welfare
   Rs 158 crores, 1.5 lakh families under Velugu
   Maragujju - handicapped
   Revolving fund
   Power
   4110 MWs to be added
   Rs 400 crores for 100% electrification of habitations
   Rs 7000 crores for quality power at affordable rates
   Timely and quality power for agriculture
   Roads
   Road density to be increased to 0.85 kms/ sq km
   Rs 12,284 crores
   7500 habitations to be covered
   75000 kms of rural roads
   5,100 kms of state roadways to be upgraded as National Highways
   772 kms of four laning on NH7
   2 lane National Highways to be converted to 4 lane
   Ports
   Ravva Port: 2.5 lakh tonnes of crude oil
   Machilipatnam to be developed as deep water port
   Kakinada, Krishnapatam, Gangavaram to be developed further
   Minor ports: Improvement of cargo handling capacity
   Airports
   Hyderabad international airport to be developed at a cost of Rs.1160 crores
   Extension of runway at Visakhapatnam
   Tirupathi, Rajamundhry, Vijayawada airports to be improved further
   Development of airports at Warangal and Cuddapah
   Information Technology
   Internet to all villages
   Cell phones in all villages
   e-Seva throughout the state
   All government services online
   Major thrust to IT / ITES
   Industry
   Special Economic and industrial zones
   Single window clearances
   Industrial Infrastructure Development Fund Rs.100 crores
   Netha Bazar for 7.35 lakh weavers
   Gas based industries
   Backward Area Development
   Mandal to be unit for backwardness
   Plan for development of backward villages, towns, mandals and districts to be prepared
   Education and health to be further improved
   Council for Development of Backward Areas
   Task Force Approach for Backward Areas
   Irrigation
   Water Conservation
   Micro irrigation
   Agriculture
   Agri-based industries
   HRD
   Other infrastructure
   Industrial development
   Employment generation
   Poverty eradication
   Law and Order
   Modernisation of police force
   Cyber crime, factionalism, communalism, extremism
   Multipronged strategy to tackle left wing extremism
   Citizen friendly police force
   Weaker sections
   Women
   Community policing
   Good Governance
   SMART government (Simple, Moral, Accountable, Responsive, Transparent)
   Performance tracking
   Citizen Charters
   Corruption to be tackled
   e-Procurement
   Reforms
   Public sector, legal, economic
TELUGU DESAM PARTY

With Andhra Pradesh Assembly polls scheduled in April, the Telugu Desam Party president, Mr N Chandrababu Naidu, on Thursday, released the party's manifesto, promising to implement a slew of measures aimed at empowering every section of the society.

While releasing the manifesto at the NTR Trust Bhavan in Hyderabad, he said, "Ensuring economic, food and health security would be top on the agenda of TDP if voted to power in this month's poll."

Prime among the promises made by TDP in its 64-page manifesto are a unique cash transfer scheme for the vulnerable sections, free colour television to families living below poverty line, comprehensive health insurance covering ailments from fever to heart problems, creation of 1,250 Modern Development Corridors for generation of about 25 lakh jobs, creation of a Rs 1,000 crore market stabilisation fund for the agriculture sector.

Besides this, a monthly unemployment benefit of Rs 1,000 to unemployed youth, creation of 50 lakh jobs in government and private sectors as well as self-employment, special grants to entrepreneurs for setting up industries in rural areas and supply of cooking gas for Rs 150 per cylinder has also been promised.

The government would create a Rs 5,000 crore corpus fund and also pool up another Rs 5,000 crore from banks as loan for employment generation through industrial development.

Chandrababu said, "This would give major boost to the economy besides empowering the youth."

The TDP leader, on Telangana, said they would take all required legal and political steps for creation of a separate state.

Under the CTS, a poorest of the poor family would get Rs 2,000, a poor family Rs 1,500 and a middle-class family Rs 1,000 a month.

The TDP chief said,"All eligible poor would be provided housing at Rs 1 lakh per unit."

Observing that television was the "prime source of infotainment and not a luxury",the TDP president promised to distribute free color TV sets to those from poor economic background. He also promised to enact a legislation to check political corruption in the state.

Chief Minister YS Rajasekhara Reddy and his family stand testimony to the unabashed political corruption. The TDP chief said, the election affidavits filed by the chief minister and his son Jaganmohan Reddy in 2004 and 2009 speak volumes of their personal wealth creation.

Stating that the agriculture sector too would be promoted to the international level on par with the Information Technology sector, he said, an Agriculture Development Authority would be set up.

